
===== PAGE 1 =====
Page 1 
BIEN 6391: Modeling and Simulations of Integrated Cellular Systems 
Spring 2018 
Co-Instructors:  Ranjan Dash, Ph.D. 
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering and Physiology 
Medical College of Wisconsin and Marquette University 
Room: TBRC 2910 (MCW) 
Phone: 414-955-4497 (MCW) 
Email: rdash@mcw.edu  
 
Said Audi, Ph.D. 
Professor of Biomedical Engineering 
Marquette University and Medical College of Wisconsin  
Room: Cramer Hall 160 (MU) 
Phone: 414-288-3506 (MU) 
Email: Said.Audi@marquette.edu
  
Credits: 3 credits 
Lectures: MW 5:00-6:15 pm; TBRC 2195 (MCW) 
Office hours: WF 2.00-3.30 pm (MCW for Dr. Dash and MU for Dr. Audi), or by appointment 
 
Prerequisites:  
• Calculus; Matrix algebra; Ordinary differential equations (ODEs); Numerical methods 
• Introductory Biology, Biochemistry, or Physiology 
• Computer programming (MatLab) 
 
Textbooks (recommended): 
• Quantitative Analysis of Cellular Systems. DA Beard and H Qian. Cambridge University Press, 
2008 (Cambridge Texts in Biomedical Engineering). 
• Simulation of Living Systems. DA Beard. Cambridge University Press 2012 (Cambridge Texts 
in Biomedical Engineering). 
• Dynamic Systems Biology Modeling and Simulation. J DiStefano III. Academic Press, 2014 
Elsevier Inc. 
 
Course description:  
Quantitative and mechanistic understanding of the behavior of integrated cellular systems is an 
important aspect of nearly every area of research in biology and biomedical sciences. Cellular 
biochemical/metabolic networks, signaling networks, protein-protein interaction networks, and gene 
regulatory networks represent different examples of integrated cellular systems that obey a common 
set of physicochemical laws, which can be modeled, simulated and analyzed based on a common set 
of principles derived from such laws. This course will focus on the use of kinetic and thermodynamic 
principles for modeling and analysis of integrated cellular systems. Examples of systems at different 
levels of biological organization will be covered, starting with the physiology and biochemistry of the 
system, use of basic physiochemical laws to derive the governing differential equations, and use of 
numerical methods to simulate the system behavior under physiological and pathophysiological 
conditions using computer programming (MatLab).

===== PAGE 2 =====
1/11/2018 
 Page 2 
Tentative Course Outline: This 16-week course will be organized into the following eight modules: 
1. Introduction to Simulation of Biological Systems. Review of basic mathematical concepts from 
calculus, matrix algebra, ordinary differential equations (ODEs), and numerical methods; Numerical 
methods would cover solutions of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations, ODEs, and regression 
analysis and parameter estimation; Introduction to basic modeling approaches; Mechanistic versus 
phenomenological modeling. (Weeks 1 and 2) 
2. Transport of Solutes in Biological Systems. Well-mixed systems and compartmental modeling; 
Reaction-diffusion systems and spatially-distributed modeling; Example of oxygen transport and 
metabolism in blood-tissue exchange systems. (Weeks 3 and 4) 
3. Physiologically-Based Pharmacokinetic Modeling. Tracer kinetic modeling in physiological 
systems; Pharmacokinetic modeling; Pharmacodynamic modeling; Applications in drug delivery, 
transport and metabolism. (Weeks 5 and 6) 
4. Biochemical Reaction Systems: Basic Ideas. Cellular biochemical reaction kinetics and 
thermodynamics; Catalytic mechanisms of enzymes and transporters; Emergent behaviors in small 
biochemical reaction systems. (Weeks 7 and 8) 
5. Biochemical Reaction Systems: Large-Scale System Simulations. Biochemical reaction 
systems in living cells; Approaches to modeling and simulating large-scale biochemical reaction 
systems; Examples of mitochondrial bioenergetic system. (Weeks 9 and 10) 
6. Cellular Growth and Proliferation: Biology of cell cycle regulation; Cell cycle dysregulation in 
disease; Modeling protein-protein interaction networks and simulations of mitotic cell cycle 
(dys)regulations in health and disease. (Weeks 11 and 12) 
The biology aspect of this module (2 lectures) will be taught by a Guest Lecturer: 
Scott Terhune, PhD 
Associate Professor of Microbiology and Immunology  
Medical College of Wisconsin  
7. Cellular Electrophysiology. Basis concepts of electrophysiology; Thermodynamics of charged 
species transport; The Hodgkin-Huxley model; Mechanistic models of channel and transporter 
kinetics; Cardiac electrophysiology. (Weeks 13 and 14) 
8. Final Project. In the final two weeks students will be asked to develop and independent project, 
focused on computer simulation of a real-world example, possibly drawn from their own research. 
Students will be asked to present a short project proposal in Week 15, and a progress report in Week 
16. A short (5-10 pages) report will be due by the end of the semester. (Weeks 15 and 16) 
 
Assessment: 
• Homework (5-6 HW): 45% 
o Must be typed 
o Include a title page with your 
name, HW #, and due date 
o Penalty for unexcused late homework is 10% (of total number of points)/day penalty (for up 
to three days). A homework that is late for more than three days WILL NOT be accepted 
and will receive a grade of ZERO.  
• Midterm Exam:  15%   (Monday, March 5, 2018) 
• Final exam: 15%  (Wednesday, May 9, 5:45 pm-7:45 pm) 
• Final project/presentation: 20% (due last week of classes) 
• Class attendance (REQUIRED) and participation: 5% 
  
A >93 B- 82.1 - 85 D+ 65.1 - 69 
A- 90.1 - 93 C+ 78.1 - 82 D 60.1 - 65 
B+ 87.1 - 90 C 74.1 - 78 F < 60 
B 85.1 - 87 C- 69.1 - 74

===== PAGE 3 =====
1/11/2018 
 Page 3 
  
All excuses for a missed exam MUST be proffered in advance of the exam. Students that miss 
an exam due to legal obligations or university-sanctioned activities and related travel will be 
given the opportunity to make up the exam on a day and time agreed upon by instructor and 
student. 
 
Attendance: 
 Required for both lectures (see college attendance policy) 
(http://www.marquette.edu/engineering/pages/AllYouNeed/Policies/attendance.html) 
 
 Students expecting to miss class as a result of legal obligations, or university-sanctioned 
activities and related travel should notify the instructor prior to the day of the class 
meeting.  
 
 Students may be withdrawn from or failed the course for excessive lecture absences. 
Students that have accrued five (5) or more class absences will be withdrawn from the 
course. 
 
 Please set your cell phones to silent mode and refrain from non-course 
related activities (internet browsing, texting, facebooking, tweeting, 
instagramming, snap chatting, etc.) during lecture.  
 
Academic dishonesty: 
 You are expected to honor Marquette University’s academic integrity code  
http://bulletin.marquette.edu/undergrad/academicregulations/ and  
http://www.marquette.edu/provost/integrity-index.php 
 
 Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to copying any part of computer programs 
and/or reports from another student or from previous semesters. 
 
 Any person(s) found engaged in academic dishonesty (e.g., cheating, plagiarism, 
academic fraud, etc.) will be reported to the University Academic Integrity Council and 
will be punished according to the policies set forth by Marquette University. 
 
The Honor Pledge: 
  
 I recognize the importance of personal integrity in all aspects of life and work.  
 
 I commit myself to truthfulness, honor, and responsibility, by which I earn the respect of others. 
 
 I support the development of good character, and commit myself to uphold the highest 
standards of academic integrity as an important aspect of personal integrity. 
 
 My commitment obliges me to conduct myself according to the Marquette University Honor 
Code.
