
===== PAGE 1 =====
INTRODUCTION
Advances in experimental and computa-
tional technologies for biosciences have been
revolutionizing biological research. The last
several decades have witnessed the develop-
ment and maturation of several remarkable
experimental techniques, such as DNA
sequencing technique, DNA microarray (1),
and large-scale two-dimensional protein gel
electrophoresis (2). Emerging from the applica-
tion of these technologies is a new mode of
biology, the systems biology, which empha-
sizes a holistic understanding of how biologi-
cal systems function (3,4).
As demonstrated by the successful sequenc-
ing of more than 1000 genomes of natural plas-
mids, organelles, viruses and viroids, bacteria,
plants, and animals, including mouse (5) and
human (6,7), there are few, if any, technological
hurdles in obtaining the genetic information of
virtually any organism. In addition to its
implications for practical applications, such
information promises to bring us closer to a
complete understanding on how the genetic
information stored in a genome determines the
behaviors or characteristics (i.e., the phenotype)
Toward Computational Systems Biology
Lingchong You*
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, CA 91125
Abstract
The development and successful application of high-throughput technologies are transform-
ing biological research. The large quantities of data being generated by these technologies have
led to the emergence of systems biology, which emphasizes large-scale, parallel characterization
of biological systems and integration of fragmentary information into a coherent whole.
Complementing the reductionist approach that has dominated biology for the last century, math-
ematical modeling is becoming a powerful tool to achieve an integrated understanding of com-
plex biological systems and to guide experimental efforts of engineering biological systems for
practical applications. Here I give an overview of current mainstream approaches in modeling
biological systems, highlight speciﬁc applications of modeling in various settings, and point out
future research opportunities and challenges.
Index Entries: Systems biology; mathematical modeling; gene networks; deterministic simula-
tion; stochastic simulation; biological databases.
*Author to whom all correspondence and reprint
requests should be addressed. E-mail: you@cheme.
caltech.edu
REVIEW ARTICLE
© Copyright 2004 by Humana Press Inc.
All rights of any nature whatsoever reserved.
1085-9195/04/40/167–184/$25.00
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics
167 Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 2 =====
of an organism or a cell in a particular environ-
ment. As shown in Fig. 1, however, much
remains to be done to really make the link
between a genome and the resulting pheno-
type(s). Logical next steps in this odyssey are to
identify the genes in a genome and to determine
their functions, in particular, by elucidating what
products these genes produce and how these
products interact with one another. For any par-
ticular biological system, these downstream
analyses can be orders of magnitude more com-
plex than sequencing the genome. Indeed, they
require a wide spectrum of tools to characterize
individual gene products by using biochemical,
biophysical, or genetic techniques or a large set
of such molecular components by proﬁling gene
expression at the mRNA level—using DNA
microarray (1)—or at the protein level—using
two-dimensional protein gels (2) or mass spec-
trometry (8–10). In addition, other high-through-
put techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid
analysis (11), have been successfully applied to
study interactions between gene products at a
large scale (12,13).
Yet, large-scale characterization of the com-
ponents of biological systems is not the ulti-
mate goal, and it should not be. Supposing that
someday we succeed in characterizing the func-
tion of all genes in a cell by identifying all the
gene products and constructing the interaction
168 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004
Fig. 1. A new mode of biology research. Sequencing of various genomes has led to the question
as how these genomes “program” cellular behaviors, or the phenotype, in a particular environment.
Different intermediate levels of understanding need to be established to make this connection (left
panel). Many computational and experimental tools (right panel) are required in achieving such
understanding. Mathematical modeling will play a key role in integrating fragmentary information
into a coherent whole. A fundamental goal of modeling is to explain existing data and to predict
system behaviors. Every model should be examined in the context of experiment whenever possi-
ble. Iterations of model prediction, comparison with experiment, and model revision in the light of
new data and mechanisms will constantly improve our understanding of the underlying system.
(See text for details.)

===== PAGE 3 =====
map among these gene products, will we have
completed the link between the genome and
cellular behaviors? Partly. Extensive as it is, all
this information is still local and fragmentary.
Knowing what a cell is composed of and how
each component works does not necessarily
mean understanding how the cell as a whole
works. For example, understanding what parts
a car is composed of and how each part works
does not mean that we would understand how
the car itself works. To be conﬁdent that we
understand how the car works, we should be
able to put the parts back together and demon-
strate that the car works. Similarly, to under-
stand how a cell function as a whole, we will
need to integrate our understanding of the
parts and see whether or to what extent these
pieces of understanding will coherently predict
cellular behaviors. For any system, the process
of integrating and analyzing the information on
individual pieces can be loosely defined as
“modeling.” 
Regardless of its formulation, a model by
definition represents an integration of the
knowledge of the underlying system. It is
based on answers to questions such as: what
components is the system composed of? And
how do they interact? Note that the integration
of fragmentary information is a critical step for
achieving global, system-level understanding.
As discussed in detail in the section Speciﬁc
Applications, this integration process helps to
reveal features not easily recognizable by
examining the constituent parts. For example,
information regarding some individual pieces
may be inconsistent with other information,
but we often will not know the inconsistency
until we put these pieces together. The funda-
mental goal of a model is to explain existing
data and to predict system behaviors.
Oftentimes, model predictions will deviate
from the experiment, which calls for re-evalua-
tion of the knowledge integrated into the
model or for additional experiments. Either
way, our understanding will improve by going
through iterations of model prediction, com-
parison between the model prediction and
experiment, and model reﬁnement (see Fig. 1). 
The wide appreciation and interest in model-
ing biological systems is evidenced by the pub-
lication of not only countless modeling studies,
but also many excellent reviews that discuss
various aspects of modeling (4,14–23) (note “A
Brief Guide to Recent Reviews” in ref. 17).
Intending to give a comprehensive tutorial on
modeling in biology, here is provided an
overview of mainstream modeling approaches
and discuss their application domains. To
achieve this goal, many details are omitted of
these modeling approaches but instead their
connections are highlighted between each other
so that they can be examined in a coherent man-
ner. Focusing on kinetic models, recent applica-
tions are discussed of modeling in enhancing
our understanding of natural or engineered bio-
logical systems. Although modeling is the focus
issue of this review, I strive to put the discus-
sions in a broader context of systems biology,
emphasizing how modeling may facilitate sys-
tem-level study or understanding of complex
biological systems. Finally, this article closes
with some future opportunities and challenges
for the mathematical modeling community.
MODELING WI TH VARYING
RESOLUTIONS
Qualitative Models
Depending on its speciﬁc objectives, a model
may involve details at different levels. One of
the most profound biological models is the
central dogma of molecular biology, which
describes the basic information transfer
process from DNA to RNA and from RNA to
protein (Fig. 2). Although omitting many
details involved in the individual steps—for
example, the binding of RNA polymerases to
the DNA sequence during transcription—the
central dogma summarizes decades of
endeavor by biologists that led to the elucida-
tion of this process (24). Reducing complex bio-
logical processes into one dimension, it has
served as an elegant conceptual framework for
the establishment of molecular biology. As
Toward Computational Systems Biology 169
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 4 =====
with all other models, the central dogma as
depicted in Fig. 2 only reﬂects partial truth,
and it evolves. Decades of biological research
has tremendously enriched the content of the
model—a more accurate representation of the
relationship, although still omitting details,
would include the replication of DNA, reverse
transcription of RNA to DNA, replication of
RNA, and catalyzing role of the protein in all
these processes. 
The central dogma exempliﬁes probably the
most intuitive models that biologists have
been using: diagrams. Diagrams have been
widely used and will probably continue to
prevail in biology textbooks and the literature.
Recently, there have been signiﬁcant efforts to
formalize the conventions of drawing diagram
models (25). Diagrams have served as tremen-
dous visual aids in understanding the biologi-
cal processes and for formulating new
hypotheses to be tested experimentally. In a
closely related area, several groups have ana-
lyzed large-scale metabolic networks based
solely on the connectivity of network compo-
nents (26–33). Unlike conventional diagrams
that involve perhaps dozens of components at
most, wiring of thousands of components
(often proteins) in these large systems makes
little sense to the naked eye. Yet computational
analysis has provided insights into some
global, usually topological properties of meta-
bolic networks, such as degree of network con-
nectivity, clustering of network components,
and lengths of biochemical pathways (26–31).
Recently, this statistical approach has been
applied to reveal potential cellular motifs in
large metabolic networks (32,33). Despite their
intuitiveness (excluding computer-generated
diagrams of large metabolic networks), the
drawback of diagrams is that they are descrip-
tive only, and cannot predict in a quantitative
and sometimes not even in a qualitative fash-
ion behaviors of a given system.
The simplest approach to characterizing the
dynamics of biological networks is a Boolean
model, which is often applied to studying
gene networks (34–36). In this paradigm, each
player (e.g., a gene) has two states, on and off;
the system of interest is represented as a logic
network, and the dynamics describe how
genes interact to change one another’s states
over time. A Boolean model is advantageous
in its simplicity and it does not require
detailed data on how cellular components
interact. Despite their apparent simplicity,
Boolean models can provide many insights
into the qualitative behavior of the underlying
system. For instance, Kauffman has success-
fully employed Boolean models to explore
self-organization phenomena and their impli-
cations in evolution (37). Yet, Boolean models
are often overly simplified and tend to give
ambiguous predictions on system behaviors
(38). For example, consider a simple circuit in
which a component S negatively regulates its
own accumulation. In the Boolean formula-
tion, this process can be modeled as: S(T + 1)
= NOT S(T), where S(T) means the state of S at
time step T. This model predicts that the level
of S will oscillate between 0 and 1, irrespec-
tive of the initial condition. However, in real-
ity, such a system often leads to a steady state
(e.g., see ref. 39) unless there is a significant
time delay in the self-regulation. In addition,
some ambiguity is evident in the simple
model: the function “NOT” could mean that S
slows down its own synthesis or that S facili-
tates its own degradation.
170 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004
Fig. 2. The central dogma of molecular biology. The central dogma states that genetic information
can be perpetuated or transferred, but the transfer of information into protein is irreversible (151).

===== PAGE 5 =====
Quantitative Models
Am ore detailed and precise approach of
representing a biological system is to treat it as
a network of chemical reactions (Fig. 3). To ana-
lyze the system, one needs the stoichiometry of
all the reactions involved. Using this formula-
tion, one can gain deep insights into the
steady-state system behavior and characteris-
tics of the network topology by merely analyz-
ing the underlying stoichiometric matrix
(40–42). A number of computational tech-
Toward Computational Systems Biology 171
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004
Fig. 3. A simple predator-prey system. (A) A diagram representation of the predator-prey sys-
tem: The prey feeds on unspeciﬁed foods (represented by *) but is consumed by the predator. The
predator dies and degenerates into unspeciﬁed products (represented by *). Thus the prey promotes
the increase in the predator population (indicated by +) but the predator facilitates the decrease in
the prey population (indicated by a –). (B) The system can be represented by a set of simple reac-
tions (X = prey; Y = predator); each reaction is characterized by its stoichiometry and its kinetics.
(C) A typical deterministic simulation result from an ODE model based on the reactions in (B). The
differential equations used for this simulation are: 
.
(D) A typical simulation result using the Gillespie algorithm. Results in (C) and (D) were generated
using Dynetica (i.e., a simulator of dynamic networks) (143). Levels of prey and predator are
expressed in numbers. Note how the stochastic simulation result resembles the deterministic simula-
tion result in terms of qualitative behavior—oscillation—but drastically differs from the latter in
numerical details. From the given initial condition, the stochastic simulation can generate completely
different dynamics from the deterministic simulation (not shown).
dX dY—– = k1X – k2XY; —– = k2XY – k3Ydt dt

===== PAGE 6 =====
niques, such as metabolic ﬂux analysis (41,42)
and ﬂux balance analysis (43), have been suc-
cessfully developed to assist such analysis.
They have played an instrumental role in shap-
ing the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering, by pro-
viding theoretical guidance for experimental
manipulation of metabolic networks (44).
Recently, these techniques have been success-
fully employed to reveal the underlying struc-
ture of metabolic networks by determining the
elementary ﬂux modes (45) and the null space
base vectors (46), and in predicting steady-
state metabolic capabilities of several model
organisms, such as Escherichia coli (47,48) and
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae (49).
However, it is often difﬁcult to formulate in
stoichiometric models regulatory interactions
(50), which are clearly ubiquitous in biological
systems. Moreover, because stoichiometric
models lack the time-domain in their formula-
tion, they are unable to predict the temporal
evolution of biological systems. To make such
predictions, a stoichiometric model needs be
supplemented with detailed kinetic informa-
tion. That is, one needs to specify how fast each
reaction is occurring, in addition to its stoi-
chiometry (Fig. 3B). Compared with stoichio-
metric models, the drawback of kinetic models
appears obvious: construction of each model
will require much more information, and
kinetic data are usually much more difﬁcult to
acquire than the stoichiometry of a reaction
network. But the payoff of the added complex-
ity is signiﬁcant: with an appropriate kinetic
model, the modeler can gain much deeper
insight into the behavior of the system than
with a stoichiometric model.
Usually kinetic models are represented as a
set of ordinary differential equations (ODE)
describing the rates of change for the interact-
ing components (Fig. 3B). Solving these ODEs,
often numerically, generates time courses of
the interacting components. This ability to pre-
dict dynamical behaviors is essential for ana-
lyzing systems with rich temporal behaviors,
such as circadian clocks. ODE-based kinetic
models are also termed deterministic because a
given initial condition will completely deter-
mine the temporal behavior of the underlying
systems (within the errors of the numerical
solutions) (Fig. 3C). As to be discussed in the
following section, kinetic models can be for-
mulated in a stochastic framework, which may
give finer details of system dynamics by
revealing random ﬂuctuations in the numbers
of each interacting component.
Application of kinetic models in biology has a
long history. For example, Lotka and Volterra
independently developed a kinetic model
nearly 80 years ago to describe dynamics of a
predator-prey ecosystem (as cited in (51); see also
Fig. 3). Today, kinetic modeling continues to
play a major role in modern ecology (51,52). In
cellular biology, decades of genetic, biochemical,
and biophysical studies have generated a large
amount of experimental data that can be used to
deduce reaction mechanisms and rate constant
parameters, which in turn makes kinetic model-
ing a preferable choice for describing cellular
processes (16,19,23). This point is particularly
obvious for many well-characterized systems,
including bacterial chemotaxis signaling net-
works (53,54), developmental pattern formation
in Drosophila (55–58), aggregation stage network
of Dictyostelium (59), viral infection (60–65), cir-
cadian rhythms (66,67), E. coli stress response
circuit(68), single E. coli cell growth (69), yeast
cell-cycle control (70,71), and physiological
processes (72–74).
Kinetic models may be coupled with equa-
tions describing mass transport processes,
leading to more complicated mathematical
models. For example, in modeling some bio-
logical processes, it is necessary and feasible to
account for not only reaction kinetics, but also
transport of interacting components by diffu-
sion. This approach is most commonly adopted
in models describing the spatiotemporal
dynamics of small chemicals such as calcium
(75–79) and cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(80–83), or larger components (84–89) whose
transport can be treated as diffusion. Such
models often involve using partial differential
equations (PDE) in addition to ODEs. Current
efforts are under way to acquire detailed infor-
mation on the distribution of molecules in the
172 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 7 =====
cell. Yet, for most intracellular gene expression
processes, experimental data on the spatial
domain are often too sparse to make sensible
PDE models. In addition, solving a PDE model
often invokes much higher computational cost
for the same number of interacting compo-
nents. Thus, most current mathematical mod-
els of gene regulation networks have ignored
spatial heterogeneity in a system. When it is
essential to describe transport processes, these
processes may be approximated by ﬁrst-order
reactions, which fall into the framework of
ODE models (55,56,63). 
Stochastic Formulation 
of Reaction Networks 
Despite their broad applications, ODE-based
kinetic models are criticized for their implicit
assumption of continuity in the concentrations
of interacting cellular species, particularly for
intracellular processes. In  particular, many
proteins are expressed at nanomolar levels,
which correspond to only tens or hundreds of
molecules per cell. In this scenario, the small
numbers of the interacting species can lead to
signiﬁcant random ﬂuctuations in the levels of
these species. A good deal of experimental
data has indeed demonstrated significant
noise in gene expression processes (90–94).
Deterministic in nature, ODE models will fail
to predict such ﬂuctuations. For this reason,
some researchers have questioned the use of
deterministic simulations in characterizing the
behaviors of biological systems, and suggested
using stochastic simulations instead (95–97). 
Several algorithms are available for carrying
out stochastic simulations (98); the Gillespie
algorithm (99) is by far the most popular.
Following a Monte Carlo procedure, the
Gillespie algorithm predicts the time evolution
of the system by determining when and in
what order the next reaction is going to occur.
This algorithm has a rigorous theoretical foun-
dation, and is shown to give exact solution for
a network of elementary reactions occurring in
a well-stirred environment (99,100). It often
generates dynamics drastically different from
the prediction by deterministic simulations,
particularly when some reactions have nonlin-
ear terms in their rate expressions ( 101; see also
Fig. 3D). The application of stochastic simula-
tions has led to speculations regarding the
implications of intracellular noise, in particu-
lar, how it may be exploited in nature and how
it can be effectively controlled (98). For exam-
ple, it has been suggested that the intrinsic
noise might be exploited in generating pheno-
typic diversity in a clonal population so that
the population is more capable of surviving
different environments (102). 
Although the Gillespie algorithm reveals sto-
chastic ﬂuctuations resulting from small molec-
ular numbers, several outstanding questions
make it unclear whether or to what extent it is
more appropriate than a deterministic approach
in modeling cellular reaction networks. From a
practical perspective, well-polished computa-
tional techniques (e.g., bifurcation analysis—
analysis of qualitative changes in the dynamics
of a system caused by the variation of some sys-
tem parameters (103)) and software tools (e.g.,
Xppaut at http://www.math.pitt.edu/~bard/
xpp/xpp.html) are available for high-level
analysis of system dynamics using ODEs,
although such analysis is far from practical
using the stochastic formulation (18,98). Also,
stochastic simulations by the Gillespie algo-
rithm are often much more time consuming
than deterministic simulations. In fact, the com-
putation time of this algorithm approximately
scales with the frequency of the reaction events:
the more reactions there are, or the more mole-
cules there are, the longer the computation will
take for a given simulated time span (99). Recent
efforts have been made to improve the compu-
tation efﬁciency of stochastic simulations, either
by directly improving the efﬁciency of the
Gillespie algorithm while keeping its rigor (104),
or by approximating the computation for fast
reactions when separation of time scales is justi-
ﬁable (105,106). Another alternative to exact
simulation by the Gillespie algorithm is to incor-
porate ﬂuctuations by explicitly including ran-
dom variables in the differential equations
describing the system (107–111). This approach
Toward Computational Systems Biology 173
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 8 =====
results in a Langevin equation or a stochastic
differential equation, leading to substantial gain
in computation speed at the acceptable loss of
computation accuracy (109,110). A major advan-
tage of this approach is that it ties the basis of
Gillespie algorithm—a chemical master equa-
tion—to a conventional, deterministic formula-
tion of chemical kinetics. In fact, a chemical
master equation is shown to be asymptotically
equivalent to the corresponding Langevin equa-
tion under certain conditions (109). For more
detailed discussion on this topic, the reader is
directed to an excellent recent review (98). 
Aside from the issue of computational
speed, a fundamental question is to what
extent the simulated noise reflects the true
noise. For the Gillespie algorithm to be exact,
the system must consist of elementary reac-
tions only and it must be well-stirred (i.e., spa-
tially homogeneous) (99,100). These criteria
are rarely met when modeling intracellular
processes: the intracellular environment is
highly heterogeneous and many a reaction
lumps multiple steps. For example, a reaction
as basic as transcription of a single gene con-
sists of several more basic steps, such as bind-
ing of RNA polymerase to promoter region in
forming a closed complex, formation of an
open complex, and eventually transcriptional
elongation. Moreover, in addition to small
numbers of interacting molecules, random-
ness may stem from other factors, such as the
cellular components not speciﬁed in the model
and even conformational changes of biological
macromolecules. From this standpoint, the
Gillespie algorithm, as well as other stochastic
algorithms, gives empirical predictions (when
applied to describing intracellular processes),
just as its ODE counterpart does. In fact, recent
experiments by Elowitz et al. demonstrated
that the total noise of gene expression consists
of both intrinsic noise and extrinsic noise, and
that the total noise does not correlate with the
intrinsic noise (91). It is probable, but not
proven, that the noise generated by the
Gillespie algorithm accounts for a major part
of the intrinsic noise but not the extrinsic noise
for cellular processes. In all, one needs to take
caution in interpreting the ﬂuctuations gener-
ated by a stochastic simulation. 
SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
Because the majority of current mathemati-
cal models of biological systems are kinetic
models, I will focus here on applications of
kinetic models only. The categorization of dif-
ferent applications is somewhat arbitrary. It
should also be noted that some of these appli-
cations may be achieved by other types of the
modeling as well, with potentially different
resolutions and outcomes. 
Revealing Gaps in Current Understanding 
By integrating current understanding of the
underlying system, a kinetic model can be used
to test the consistency in the experimental data
or mechanisms. Often times, model predictions
will deviate from the experiment. This discrep-
ancy is not necessarily a negative thing; in fact,
it can be very informative. It indicates the gap
or hole in our knowledge (or at least the
knowledge integrated into the model) and may
provide guidance for future experimentation. 
von Dassow et al. recently developed a
mathematical model of the segmentation net-
work of Drosophila embryo development (55).
Their initial model based on known network
connectivity was unable to predict the segmen-
tation pattern observed in experiments. To test
whether this discrepancy was due to inaccurate
parameters, the authors randomly changed the
kinetic parameters over a wide range of plausi-
ble values and carried out simulations for each
parameter set. However, none of these parame-
ter sets could generate the desired pattern. This
discrepancy between simulation and experi-
ment, the authors argued, indicates a gap in the
understanding of the segmentation network.
Specifically, if the network connectivity as
implemented in the initial model had been cor-
rect, then at least some parameter sets should
have generated the desired pattern. To account
for the discrepancy, the authors hypothesized
174 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 9 =====
additional connections, based on experimental
observations in the literature, in their network
model and repeated their computational analy-
sis. Interestingly, the added links indeed
seemed to be an important missing piece: their
model now could generate the desired pattern
for a signiﬁcant portion of the parameter sets
they generated. Although these predictions
await experimental veriﬁcation, this work high-
lights a key use of modeling: to identify incon-
sistency in our knowledge and to suggest
experimentally testable hypothesis. It is worth
noting that a similar model was developed by
Reinitz et al. to describe pattern formation in
Drosophila embryos (56–58). The strength of
these studies lies in the extensive use of
detailed experimental data to ﬁt the parameters
in the dynamic model and subsequent applica-
tion of the model to explore speciﬁc roles of dif-
ferent genes in forming embryonic patterns. 
Based on more than four decades of litera-
ture data, Endy et al. developed a detailed
model of phage T7 (62). This model describes
the entire intracellular life cycle of the virus
from the entry of viral genome to the produc-
tion of viral progeny. This model was later
used to predict how the viral growth rate
would depend on the organization of genetic
elements (such as genes, promoters, and tran-
scription terminators) (112,113). Among other
results, the simulation predicted that the T7
growth rate overall would decrease as the T7
polymerase gene (gene 1) was moved away
from the entering end of the T7 genome. This
makes intuitive sense: the further downstream
T7 gene 1 is, the more delayed its expression.
The delay in gene 1 expression subsequently
would lead to a delay in the expression of the
majority of T7 genes, thus slowing down T7
growth. Interestingly, the simulation also pre-
dicted that when gene 1 is immediately down-
stream the early T7 promoters, the T7 growth
rate would be higher than the wild-type value
because of the establishment of a positive feed-
back for the production of T7 RNA poly-
merase. However, experimental results with
three ectopic gene 1 mutants only veriﬁed the
optimality of the wild-type T7. The mutant
ecto1.7, which was predicted to grow faster
than the wild type, turned out to grow much
more slowly. One possible reason for this mis-
match, the authors found, was that disruption
of the seemingly nonessential gene 1.7 (in
ecto1.7, gene 1 was inserted within the coding
region of gene 1.7) actually had significant
quantitative effects on T7 growth due to
unknown mechanisms. 
Another possible reason for the discrepancy
is the assumption that the host cell offers
unlimited translation resources, such as ribo-
somes and amino acids. In fact, with a more
realistic representation of the E. coli host (65),
an extended T7 model was able to give more
accurate predictions for the growth of ectopic
gene 1 mutants (114). The revised simulation
showed that the positive feedback for produc-
ing the T7 RNA polymerase was detrimental to
overall viral growth by causing unfavorable
distribution of limited protein synthesis
resources. Moreover, the revised model also
predicted that the phage T7 growth rate would
be faster in faster growing host cells, a predic-
tion that was soon conﬁrmed experimentally
(65). In addition to suggesting possible mecha-
nisms for the mismatch between the original
model and experiment, these series of work
based on the revised model highlighted the
importance of the host environment in the
development of an organism, a factor ignored
in the original T7 model. 
Characterizing Emergent Properties 
Mathematical models are beginning to
reveal the so-called emergent properties, which
are often difﬁcult to grasp intuitively by exam-
ining the constituent parts of these systems. An
often-characterized emergent property is
robustness of a system. For experimental biolo-
gists, robustness describes the stability of a
phenotype in the presence of genetic and envi-
ronmental variations, but the term often comes
with some ambiguity in its exact meaning and
is difﬁcult to quantify (115). In a well-deﬁned
mathematical model, however, robustness can
be quantiﬁed in a straightforward fashion: it
Toward Computational Systems Biology 175
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 10 =====
can be measured by the sensitivity of a system
function to variations in parameters. 
Barkai and Leibler (53) carried out a detailed
analysis of how the output of a chemotaxis net-
work responds to perturbations in the kinetic
parameters that deﬁne the network behavior.
Their simulations demonstrated that key prop-
erties of the network are robust to parametric
perturbations. Admirably, key ﬁndings of this
computational study were later verified by
experimental work from the same group (116).
The authors went on arguing that such robust
behavior might be a generic feature that is nec-
essary to ensure proper functioning of a wide
variety of biological systems (53). This argu-
ment was echoed by Morohashi et al. (117),
who contended that robustness to variations
could be used as a measure of the plausibility
of the models of a given system. Moreover, oth-
ers have argued that many complex systems,
including biological systems, often demon-
strate “robust yet fragile” features (118,119).
These arguments are gaining support from sev-
eral recent modeling studies. In the previously
mentioned work by von Dassow et al. (55), the
“remedied” version of the Drosophila segmen-
tation network model demonstrated robust
features: the model was able to predict the cor-
rect segmentation pattern for a wide range of
parameter settings (55). Later, the same group
found that another system—the Drosophila
neurogenic network—also demonstrated sig-
nificant robustness with respect to network
parameters (120). Using an extended phage T7
model, You and Yin recently found that the
ability of phage T7 to survive was overall
robust to perturbations to its kinetic parame-
ters that deﬁne its physiology, but sensitive to
perturbations to the organization of genetic
elements in the genome (121). 
Analysis of robustness by modeling is still a
relatively new area. Despite impressive pro-
gresses made so far, open questions remain as
whether and to what extent results generated
from simulations reflect reality (122). A major
challenge in addressing these questions is to
properly map kinetic parameters to the geno-
type of a given biological system. Ideally, we
should be able to answer the question: what
mutations are required to achieve a certain
amount of change in a given parameter?
However, this mapping is difficult for many
parameters, especially when a mutation in
one gene may affect multiple phenotypic
traits (112,123). 
Testing Complex Hypotheses 
As models become more “realistic” by incor-
porating increasingly detailed data and
mechanisms, they may be treated as in silico
organisms and used to explore applied or fun-
damental questions that are beyond the under-
lying system per se. In particular, such complex
models can also be called upon to test hypothe-
ses or theories that are difﬁcult, expensive, or
even impossible to explore experimentally with
current technology. Note that the ability to
quantitatively test complex hypotheses is an
important feature of sophisticated kinetic mod-
els. Models of further abstraction, such as dia-
grams or Boolean models, lack this ability,
largely because of detachment between system
behaviors and physical parameters. 
Thanks to the ease of using the phage T7
model to create thousands of T7 mutants in sil-
ico and to efﬁciently evaluate their ﬁtness, You
and Yin were able to systematically characterize
the nature of the interactions among deleteri-
ous mutations in terms of their effects on ﬁtness
at the population level (123). Such genetic inter-
actions play a major role in a variety of funda-
mental biological phenomena, including
evolution of recombination, dynamics of ﬁtness
landscapes, and buffering of genetic variations,
but their experimental characterization has
been hindered by the difﬁculty in generating
and quantifying a large number of mutants.
From their simulation, You and Yin found that
the nature of genetic interactions depended on
the growth environment for the organism, as
well as the severity of the deleterious muta-
tions. Their results offered an intuitive explana-
tion for the seemingly conﬂicting conclusions
on the nature of genetic interactions from prior
experimental studies: the mutations tested in
176 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 11 =====
experiments may have been of differing sever-
ity, and their interactions may have been tested
in different environments. 
Guiding Experimental Design 
of De Novo Gene Circuits 
With the elucidation of a wide variety of bio-
logical components, including genes and gene
expression regulation elements, there has been
soaring enthusiasm for building de novo or syn-
thetic gene networks in the last several years
(39,124–131). Designing and constructing such
synthetic gene networks has great potential in
generating genetic “gadgets” with novel appli-
cations, as well as in improving our under-
standing of how cellular components function.
As discussed in detail in a recent review (126),
the basic strategy of constructing such net-
works follows roughly the same procedure:
1. Outline the basic network connectivity.
2. Analyze the network behavior by mathe-
matical modeling.
3. Implement the network experimentally.
Usually the adopted models are purpose-
fully simplified to capture the qualitative
behavior of the designed system. In addition to
time course simulations, bifurcation analysis is
often employed to examine how qualitative
characteristics of the system dynamics may
depend on model parameters (103). So far, this
deceivingly simple procedure has yielded only
a few successful products, including a negative
feedback control circuit (39), a toggle switch
(128), a ring oscillator (or the “repressilator”)
(129), a relaxation-type oscillator (132), and a
genetic inverter (130). One of the major chal-
lenges of constructing these engineered circuits
is that the behavior of the implemented circuit
often deviated signiﬁcantly from the predicted
behavior. This is probably more an indication
of our lack of detailed understanding of how
cellular components function than a failure of
the approach. In fact, in a sense the success of
this series of seminal work was safeguarded by
the proper use of modeling. For example, in
designing the repressilator, a simpliﬁed kinetic
model was used to highlight several design
goals for achieving the desired function—oscil-
lations in protein concentrations (129). In con-
structing the genetic inverter, Weiss used a
mathematical model to guide his efforts to
“rationally debug” an initially nonfunctional
circuit. When modeling fails, powerful experi-
mental methods can come into play. As demon-
strated by recent seminal work (133),
directed-evolution techniques, which have
proven to be particularly powerful for optimiz-
ing enzymes (134,135), are equally valuable for
ﬁne-tuning the function of de novo gene cir-
cuits. In addition to ﬁne-tuning circuit func-
tions, this “design-then-mutate” approach may
also play an important role in the development
and reﬁnement of quantitative models by offer-
ing additional structure-function insights (136).
OUTLOOK: A MATURING
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MODELING 
With increasing appreciation of the merit
of modeling for deeper understanding of bio-
logical systems, I anticipate that two lines of
related research efforts—namely, the devel-
opment of biologist-friendly modeling tools
and high-level databases harboring informa-
tion on biomolecular interactions (including
pathway databases)—will dramatically facili-
tate broader application of modeling in biol-
ogy by providing an streamlined platform for
storage and communication of data and inte-
grated models. 
Software Tools 
Despite its potential beneﬁts for fundamental
and applied biological research, the application
of mathematical modeling in biology has been
hindered by the lack of software tools to build,
analyze, and visualize models, particularly for
researchers unfamiliar with programming and
numerical methods. But the situation is chang-
ing. To address this issue, a number of programs
that aim to facilitate the model construction and
analysis have been developed in the last several
Toward Computational Systems Biology 177
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 12 =====
years. A partial list of these programs includes
Gepasi (137), DBsolve (138), E-Cell (139), Virtual
Cell (140,141), StochSim (97), Jarnac/Jdesigner
(http://www.cds.caltech.edu/~hsauro/
index.htm), Cellerator (142), and Dynetica
(121,143). 
Although different implementation strate-
gies are adopted, all these programs strive to
provide an intuitive interface and versatile
simulation capabilities for the user. It is as yet
difficult to give an unbiased evaluation of all
these programs without detailed third-party
benchmark comparisons. Briefly, Gepasi and
DBsolve focus on the analysis of biochemical
and metabolic networks. In addition to basic
time-course simulations, these programs pro-
vide additional modules to explore the prop-
erties of metabolic networks. E-Cell aims to
construct whole-cell models, and it has been
applied to model a self-sustaining hypothetic
cell (144) and a human erythrocyte (139).
Virtual Cell is advantageous in that it
accounts for the diffusion of molecules in
addition to their reactions in describing cellu-
lar processes. StochSim simulates the system
dynamics using an approximate stochastic
algorithm, which is more efficient but less
accurate than the Gillespie algorithm. Janarc
is an interactive and interpreted language
for describing and modeling cellular net-
works, and it can interact with JDesigner, a
tool for visual construction of these networks.
Implemented using Mathematica as the back
end, Cellerator introduces palette-driven,
arrow-based notations to represent biochemi-
cal reaction networks, and provides a mecha-
nism to translate these representations into
ODEs that can be solved by Mathematica.
Dynetica integrates model construction, analy-
sis, and network visualization into a unified
modeling framework; it is distinct from oth-
ers in that (1) it allows time-course simula-
tions using both deterministic algorithm
(ODE-based) and the Gillespie algorithm (e.g.,
see Fig. 3), and (2) it facilitates the construction
of genetic networks, where the majority of
reactions revolve around gene expression
(121,143). 
Although encouraging for biologists, an
immediate issue raised by these diverse pro-
grams is the lack of compatibility among them.
To address this issue, there have been many
efforts toward developing standard modeling
languages, particularly the SBML (Systems
Biology Markup Language) (145) (see also
http://www.cds.caltech.edu/erato) and the
CellML (Cell Markup Language) (http://www.
cellml.org), both of which are based on XML
(http://www.xml.org), a popular structural data
representation language. It is foreseeable that in
the near future, many of these programs can
share models via such standard modeling lan-
guages. If this is realized, the user can use any of
the modeling software to build models and con-
veniently switch to other tools if needed. As
such, the user can take full advantage of differ-
ent software packages with minimum efforts. 
Databases of Biological Interactions 
The usefulness of a model is often deter-
mined by the quality of the underlying experi-
mental data and mechanisms. This point
highlights the importance of managing such
information. But what kind of information
should we document? A good starting point is
probably the data on biomolecular interactions
and reaction pathways, because these types of
data can be mapped into a model in a straight-
forward fashion. In fact, an amazing number of
databases or knowledge environments have
been developed along this line, many being
accessible from the Internet. Notably among
these are the AfCS-Nature Signaling Gateway
(http://www.signalinggateway.org), the Bio-
molecular Interaction Network Database (BIND,
http://www.bind.ca/) (146), the Database of
Interacting Proteins (DIP , http://dip.doe-mbi.
ucla.edu/) (147), the EcoCyc (http://www.
ecocyc.org/) (148), the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.
genome.ad.jp/kegg/) (149), and the Signaling
Transduction Knowledge Environment (http://
stke.sciencemag.org/). 
The blooming efforts to collect and docu-
ment experimental data on cellular processes
178 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 13 =====
reﬂect encouraging recent progresses in acquir-
ing such data in large quantities. More impor-
tantly, the documented data are beginning to
form an information infrastructure for high-
level data compilation and analysis. But much
challenge is still ahead, especially if one wishes
to make efﬁcient use of such information to cre-
ate mathematical models. In contrast to gene or
protein sequences, whose data structure is
straightforward to deﬁne, complexity of bio-
logical interactions as well as different ways
that researchers perceive as interactions have
hindered data representation (150). The diver-
sity of data format, data quality, notations, and
access interfaces will probably pose a hurdle
even greater than incompatible modeling lan-
guages for communicating these interaction
data. To maximally beneﬁt the research com-
munity, the databases eventually need to con-
verge into using common standard data
formats. Again, XML or XML-based standard
languages may prove useful for addressing
the compatibility issue. In fact, XML has
already being adopted in KEGG to represent
metabolic pathways. A potential advantage of
databases built upon a standard representa-
tion language is that the stored data can be
readily mapped into an integrated mathemati-
cal model. In the long run, standardization of
data representation languages may not only
facilitate the construction of the information
technology infrastructure per se, but also pro-
vide guidance and incentive for experimental
biologists to document data in a more consis-
tent fashion. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I thank Edward Massaro for inviting me to
write this review. I gratefully acknowledge
John Yin and Frances Arnold for their advice
and guidance. Chris Rao and two anonymous
reviewers provided many valuable comments
to the manuscript. Financial support is pro-
vided by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) under Award No.
N66001-02-1-8929.
REFERENCES
1. Schena, M., Shalon, D., Davis, R. W., and
Brown, P . O. (1995) Quantitative monitoring of
gene expression patterns with a complemen-
tary DNA microarray. Science 270, 467–470.
2. O’Farrell, P . H. (1975) High resolution two-
dimensional electrophoresis of proteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 250, 4007–4021.
3. Kitano, H. (2002) Systems biology: a brief
overview. Science 295, 1662–1664.
4. Ideker, T., Galitski, T., and Hood, L. (2001) A
new approach to decoding life: systems biology.
Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 2, 343–372.
5. Gregory, S. G., Sekhon, M., Schein, J., Zhao, S.,
Osoegawa, K., Scott, C. E., et al. (2002) A phys-
ical map of the mouse genome. Nature 418,
743–750.
6. Lander, E. S., Linton, L. M., Birren, B.,
Nusbaum, C., Zody, M. C., Baldwin, J., et al.
(2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409, 860–921.
7. Venter, J. C., Adams, M. D., Myers, E. W., Li, P .
W., Mural, R. J., Sutton, G. G., et al. (2001) The
sequence of the human genome. Science 291,
1304–1351.
8. Eckerskorn, C., Strupat, K., Karas, M.,
Hillenkamp, F., and Lottspeich, F. (1992) Mass
spectrometric analysis of blotted proteins after
gel electrophoretic separation by matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization. Electrophoresis 13,
664–665.
9. Henzel, W. J., Billeci, T. M., Stults, J. T., Wong,
S. C., Grimley, C., and Watanabe, C. (1993)
Identifying proteins from two-dimensional
gels by molecular mass searching of peptide
fragments in protein sequence databases. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 5011–5015.
10. Mann, M., Hendrickson, R. C., and Pandey, A.
(2001) Analysis of proteins and proteomes by
mass spectrometry. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70,
437–473.
11. Fields, S. and Song, O. (1989) A novel genetic
system to detect protein-protein interactions.
Nature 340, 245–246.
12. Uetz, P ., Giot, L., Cagney, G., Mansﬁeld, T. A.,
Judson, R. S., Knight, J. R., et al. (2000) A com-
prehensive analysis of protein-protein interac-
tions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature 403,
623–627.
13. Ito, T., Chiba, T., Ozawa, R., Yoshida, M., Hattori,
M., and Sakaki, Y. (2001) A comprehensive
Toward Computational Systems Biology 179
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 14 =====
two-hybrid analysis to explore the yeast protein
interactome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98,
4569–4574.
14. Asthagiri, A. R. and Lauffenburger, D. A.
(2000) Bioengineering models of cell signaling.
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2, 31–53.
15. Arkin, A. P . (2001) Synthetic cell biology. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 12, 638–644.
16. Endy, D. and Brent, R. (2001) Modelling cellu-
lar behaviour. Nature 409 Suppl, 391–395.
17. Gilman, A. and Arkin, A. P . (2002) Genetic
“code”: representations and dynamical mod-
els of genetic components and networks.
Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 3, 341–369.
18. Rao, C. V . and Arkin, A. P . (2001) Control
motifs for intracellular regulatory networks.
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 3, 391–419.
19. Tyson, J. J., Chen, K., and Novak, B. (2001)
Network dynamics and cell physiology. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2, 908–916.
20. Palsson, B. (2000) The challenges of in silico
biology. Nat. Biotechnol. 18, 1147–1150.
21. Bailey, J. E. (1998) Mathematical modeling and
analysis in biochemical engineering: past
accomplishments and future opportunities.
Biotechnol. Prog. 14, 8–20.
22. Steven Wiley, H., Shvartsman, S. Y., and
Lauffenburger, D. A. (2003) Computational
modeling of the EGF-receptor system: a para-
digm for systems biology. Trends Cell Biol. 13,
43–50.
23. Hasty, J., McMillen, D., Isaacs, F., and Collins,
J. J. (2001) Computational studies of gene reg-
ulatory networks: in numero molecular biol-
ogy. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2, 268–279.
24. Thieffry, D. and Sarkar, S. (1998) Forty years
under the central dogma. Trends Biochem. Sci.
23, 312–316.
25. Kohn, K. W. (1999) Molecular interaction
map of the mammalian cell cycle control and
DNA repair systems. Mol. Biol. Cell. 10,
2703–2734.
26. Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z. N.,
and Barabasi, A. L. (2000) The largescale orga-
nization of metabolic networks. Nature 407,
651–654.
27. Jeong, H., Mason, S. P ., Barabasi, A. L., and
Oltvai, Z. N. (2001) Lethality and centrality in
protein networks. Nature 411, 41–42.
28. Ravasz, E., Somera, A. L., Mongru, D. A.,
Oltvai, Z. N., and Barabasi, A. L. (2002)
Hierarchical organization of modularity in
metabolic networks. Science 297, 1551–1555.
29. Rives, A. W. and Galitski, T. (2003) Modular
organization of cellular networks. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 1128–1133.
30. Wagner, A. and Fell, D. A. (2001) The small
world inside large metabolic networks. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 268, 1803–1810.
31. Strogatz, S. H. (2001) Exploring complex net-
works. Nature 410, 268–276.
32. Milo, R., Shen-Orr, S., Itzkovitz, S., Kashtan,
N., Chklovskii, D., and Alon, U. (2002)
Network motifs: simple building blocks of
complex networks. Science 298, 824–827.
33. Shen-Orr, S. S., Milo, R., Mangan, S., and Alon,
U. (2002) Network motifs in the transcriptional
regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat.
Genet. 31, 64–68.
34. Thomas, R. (1973) Boolean formalization of
genetic control circuits. J. Theor. Biol. 42, 563–585.
35. Glass, L., and Kauffman, S. A. (1973) The logical
analysis of continuous, non-linear biochemical
control networks. J. Theor. Biol. 39, 103–129.
36. Glass, L. (1975) Classiﬁcation of biological net-
works by their qualitative dynamics. J. Theor.
Biol. 54, 85–107.
37. Kauffman, S. A. (1993) The Origins of Order:
Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution,
Oxford University, New York.
38. Kuipers, B. (1986) Qualitative simulation. Artif.
Intell. 29, 289–338.
39. Becskei, A. and Serrano, L. (2000) Engineering
stability in gene networks by autoregulation.
Nature 405, 590–593.
40. Clarke, B. L. (1988) Stoichiometric network
analysis. Cell Biophys. 12, 237–253.
41. Fell, D. A. (1992) Metabolic control analysis: a
survey of its theoretical and experimental
development. Biochem. J. 286, 313–330.
42. Kacser, H., and Burns, J. A. (1995) The control
of ﬂux. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 23, 341–366.
43. Varma, A. and Palsson, B. O. (1994) Metabolic
flux balancing-basic concepts, scientific and
practical use. Bio-Technology 12, 994–998.
44. Stephanopoulos, G., Aristidou, A. A., and
Nielsen, J. (1998) Metabolic Engineering.
Principles and Methodologies, Academic, San
Diego.
45. Schuster, S., Fell, D. A., and Dandekar, T. (2000)
A general definition of metabolic pathways
useful for systematic organization and analy-
sis of complex metabolic networks. Nat.
Biotechnol. 18, 326–332.
46. Schilling, C. H. and Palsson, B. O. (1998) The
underlying pathway structure of biochemical
180 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 15 =====
reaction networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.USA95,
4193–4198.
47. Edwards, J. S., Ibarra, R. U., and Palsson, B. O.
(2001) In silico predictions of Escherichia coli
metabolic capabilities are consistent with
experimental data. Nat. Biotechnol. 19, 125–130.
48. Schilling, C. H., Edwards, J. S., and Palsson, B.
O. (1999) Toward metabolic phenomics: analy-
sis of genomic data using flux balances.
Biotechnol. Prog. 15, 288–295.
49. Edwards, J. S. and Palsson, B. O. (1999)
Systems properties of the Haemophilus
influenzae Rd metabolic genotype. J. Biol.
Chem. 274, 17410–17416.
50. Varner, J. and Ramkrishna, D. (1999)
Mathematical models of metabolic pathways.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 10, 146–150.
51. May, R. M. (1974) Stability and Complexity in
Model Ecosystems, ed. 2, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ.
52. Levin, S. A., Grenfell, B., Hastings, A., and
Perelson, A. S. (1997) Mathematical and com-
putational challenges in population biology
and ecosystems science. Science 275, 334–343.
53. Barkai, N. and Leibler, S. (1997) Robustness in
simple biochemical networks. Nature 387,
913–917.
54. Spiro, P . A., Parkinson, J. S., and Othmer, H. G.
(1997) A model of excitation and adaptation in
bacterial chemotaxis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
94, 7263–7268.
55. von Dassow, G., Meir, E., Munro, E. M., and
Odell, G. M. (2000) The segment polarity net-
work is a robust developmental module.
Nature 406, 188–192.
56. Reinitz, J., Kosman, D., Vanario-Alonso, C. E.,
and Sharp, D. H. (1998) Stripe forming archi-
tecture of the gap gene system. Dev. Genet. 23,
11–27.
57. Reinitz, J., Mjolsness, E., and Sharp, D. H.
(1995) Model for cooperative control of posi-
tional information in Drosophila by bicoid
and maternal hunchback. J. Exp. Zool. 271,
47–56.
58. Reinitz, J. and Sharp, D. H. (1995) Mechanism
of eve stripe formation. Mech. Dev. 49, 133–158.
59. Laub, M. T. and Loomis, W. F. (1998) A molec-
ular network that produces spontaneous oscil-
lations in excitable cells of Dictyostelium. Mol.
Biol. Cell. 9, 3521–3532.
60. McAdams, H. H. and Shapiro, L. (1995) Circuit
simulation of genetic networks. Science 269,
650–656.
61. Shea, M. A. and Ackers, G. K. (1985) The OR
control system of bacteriophage lambda. A
physical-chemical model for gene regulation.
J. Mol. Biol. 181, 211–230.
62. Endy, D., Kong, D., and Yin, J. (1997)
Intracellular kinetics of a growing virus: a
genetically structured simulation for bacterio-
phage T7. Biotech. Bioeng. 55, 375–389.
63. Reddy, B. and Yin, J. (1999) Quantitative intra-
cellular kinetics of HIV type 1. AIDS Res. Hum.
Retroviruses. 15, 273–283.
64. Eigen, M., Biebricher, C. K., Gebinoga, M., and
Gardiner, W. C. (1991) The hypercycle.
Coupling of RNA and protein biosynthesis in
the infection cycle of an RNA bacteriophage.
Biochemistry 30, 11005–11018.
65. You, L., Suthers, P . F., and Yin, J. (2002) Effects
of Escherichia coli physiology on growth of
phage T7 in vivo and in silico. J. Bacteriol. 184,
1888–1894.
66. Barkai, N. and Leibler, S. (2000) Circadian
clocks limited by noise. Nature 403, 267–268.
67. Smolen, P ., Baxter, D. A., and Byrne, J. H.
(2001) Modeling circadian oscillations with
interlocking positive and negative feedback
loops. J. Neurosci. 21, 6644–6656.
68. Srivastava, R., Peterson, M. S., and Bentley, W.
E. (2001) Stochastic kinetic analysis of the
Escherichia coli stress circuit using sigma(32)-
targeted antisense. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 75,
120–129.
69. Shuler, M. L., Leung, S., and Dick, C. C. (1979)
Am athematical model for the growth of a sin-
gle bacterial cell. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 326, 35–55.
70. Novak, B., Csikasz-Nagy, A., Gyorffy, B., Chen,
K., and Tyson, J. J. (1998) Mathematical model
of the ﬁssion yeast cell cycle with checkpoint
controls at the G1/S, G2/M and
metaphase/anaphase transitions. Biophys.
Chem. 72, 185–200.
71. Chen, K. C., Csikasz-Nagy, A., Gyorffy, B.,
Val, J., Novak, B., and Tyson, J. J. (2000)
Kinetic analysis of a molecular model of the
budding yeast cell cycle. Mol. Biol. Cell. 11,
369–391.
72. Quick, D. J. and Shuler, M. L. (1999) Use of in
vitro data for construction of a physiologically
based pharmacokinetic model for naphthalene
in rats and mice to probe species differences.
Biotechnol. Prog. 15, 540–555.
73. Winslow, R. L., Scollan, D. F., Holmes, A.,
Yung, C. K., Zhang, J., and Jafri, M. S. (2000)
Electrophysiological modeling of cardiac
Toward Computational Systems Biology 181
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 16 =====
ventricular function: from cell to organ.
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2, 119–155.
74. Noble, D. (2002) Modeling the heart—from
genes to cells to the whole organ. Science 295,
1678–82.
75. Dupont, G., Pontes, J., and Goldbeter, A.
(1996) Modeling spiral Ca2+ waves in single
cardiac cells: role of the spatial heterogeneity
created by the nucleus. Am. J. Physiol. 271,
C1390–C1399.
76. Schuster, S., Marhl, M., and Hofer, T. (2002)
Modelling of simple and complex calcium
oscillations. From single-cell responses to
intercellular signalling. Eur. J. Biochem. 269,
1333–1355.
77. Hofer, T., Politi, A., and Heinrich, R. (2001)
Intercellular Ca2+ wave propagation through
gap-junctional Ca2+ diffusion: a theoretical
study. Biophys. J. 80, 75–87.
78. Hofer, T., Venance, L., and Giaume, C. (2002)
Control and plasticity of intercellular calcium
waves in astrocytes: a modeling approach. J.
Neurosci. 22, 4850–4859.
79. Fink, C. C., Slepchenko, B., Moraru, II, Watras,
J., Schaff, J. C., and Loew, L. M. (2000) An
image-based model of calcium waves in differ-
entiated neuroblastoma cells. Biophys. J. 79,
163–183.
80. Palsson, E., Lee, K. J., Goldstein, R. E., Franke,
J., Kessin, R. H., and Cox, E. C. (1997) Selection
for spiral waves in the social amoebae
Dictyostelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94,
13719–13723.
81. Palsson, E. and Cox, E. C. (1996) Origin and
evolution of circular waves and spirals in
Dictyostelium discoideum territories. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 1151–1155.
82. Halloy, J., Lauzeral, J., and Goldbeter, A. (1998)
Modeling oscillations and waves of cAMP in
Dictyostelium discoideum cells. Biophys. Chem.
72, 9–19.
83. Tyson, J. J. and Murray, J. D. (1989) Cyclic AMP
waves during aggregation of Dictyostelium
amoebae. Development 106, 421–426.
84. Smith, A. E., Slepchenko, B. M., Schaff, J. C.,
Loew, L. M., and Macara, I. G. (2002) Systems
analysis of Ran transport. Science 295, 488–491.
85. You, L. and Yin, J. (1999) Ampliﬁcation and
spread of viruses in a growing plaque. J. Theor.
Biol. 200, 365–373.
86. Yin, J. and McCaskill, J. S. (1992) Replication of
viruses in a growing plaque: a reaction-diffu-
sion model. Biophys. J. 61, 1540–1549.
87. Shvartsman, S. Y., Wiley, H. S., Deen, W. M.,
and Lauffenburger, D. A. (2001) Spatial range
of autocrine signaling: modeling and compu-
tational analysis. Biophys J. 81, 1854–1867.
88. Pribyl, M., Muratov, C. B., and Shvartsman, S.
Y. (2003) Long-range signal transmission in
autocrine relays. Biophys. J. 84, 883–896.
89. Shvartsman, S. Y., Muratov, C. B., and
Lauffenburger, D. A. (2002) Modeling and
computational analysis of EGF receptor-medi-
ated cell communication in Drosophila oogen-
esis. Development 129, 2577–2589.
90. van Roon, M. A., Aten, J. A., van Oven, C. H.,
Charles, R., and Lamers, W. H. (1989) The ini-
tiation of hepatocyte-speciﬁc gene expression
within embryonic hepatocytes is a stochastic
event. Dev. Biol. 136, 508–516.
91. Elowitz, M. B., Levine, A. J., Siggia, E. D., and
Swain, P . S. (2002) Stochastic gene expression
in a single cell. Science 297, 1183–1186.
92. Ozbudak, E. M., Thattai, M., Kurtser, I.,
Grossman, A. D., and van Oudenaarden, A.
(2002) Regulation of noise in the expression of
a single gene. Nat. Genet. 31, 69–73.
93. Ross, I. L., Browne, C. M., and Hume, D. A.
(1994) Transcription of individual genes in
eukaryotic cells occurs randomly and infre-
quently. Immunol. Cell Biol. 72, 177–185.
94. Zlokarnik, G., Negulescu, P . A., Knapp, T. E.,
Mere, L., Burres, N., Feng, L., et al. (1998)
Quantitation of transcription and clonal selec-
tion of single living cells with beta-lactamase
as reporter. Science 279, 84–88.
95. McAdams, H. H. and Arkin, A. (1998)
Simulation of prokaryotic genetic circuits.
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27, 199–224.
96. Goss, P . J. E. and Peccoud, J. (1998)
Quantitative modeling of stochastic systems in
molecular biology by using stochastic Petri
nets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 6750–6755.
97. Morton-Firth, C. J. and Bray, D. (1998)
Predicting temporal ﬂuctuations in an intracel-
lular signalling pathway. J. Theor. Biol. 192,
117–128.
98. Rao, C. V ., Wolf, D. M., and Arkin, A. P . (2002)
Control, exploitation and tolerance of intracel-
lular noise. Nature 420, 231–237.
99. Gillespie, D. T. (1977) Exact stochastic simula-
tion of coupled chemical reactions. J. Phys.
Chem. 81, 2340–2361.
100. Gillespie, D. T. (1992) A rigorous derivation of
the chemical master equation. Physica A. 188,
404–425.
182 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 17 =====
101. Srivastava, R., You, L., Summers, J., and Yin, J.
(2002) Stochastic vs. deterministic modeling of
intracellular viral kinetics. J. Theor. Biol. 218,
309–321.
102. McAdams, H. H. and Arkin, A. (1997)
Stochastic mechanisms in gene expression.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 814–819.
103. Seydel, R. (1994) Practical Bifurcation and
Stability Analysis: From Equilibrium to Chaos, ed.
2, Springer-Verlag, New York.
104. Gibson, M. A. and Bruck, J. (2000) Efﬁcient
exact stochastic simulation of chemical sys-
tems with many species and many channels. J.
Phys. Chem. A. 104, 1876–1889.
105. Haseltine, E. L. and Rawlings, J. B. (2002)
Approximate simulation of coupled fast and
slow reactions for stochastic chemical kinetics.
J. Chem. Phys. 117, 6959–6969.
106. Rao, C. V . and Arkin, A. P . (2003) Stochastic
chemical kinetics and the quasi steady-state
assumption: application to the Gillespie algo-
rithm. J. Chem. Phys. 118, 4999–5010.
107. Hasty, J., Pradines, J., Dolnik, M., and Collins,
J. J. (2000) Noise-based switches and ampliﬁers
for gene expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97, 2075–2080.
108. Kep ler, T. B. and Elston, T. C. (2001)
Stochasticity in transcriptional regulation: ori-
gins, consequences, and mathematical repre-
sentations. Biophys. J. 81, 3116–3136.
109. Gillespie, D. T. (2000) The chemical Langevin
equation. J. Chem. Phys. 113, 297–306.
110. Gillespie, D. T. (2001) Approximate accelerated
stochastic simulation of chemically reacting
systems. J. Chem. Phys. 115, 1716–1733.
111.G illespie, D. T. (2002) The chemical Langevin
and Fokker-Planck equations for the reversible
isomerization reaction. J. Phys. Chem. A. 106,
5063–5071.
112. Endy, D., You, L., Yin, J., and Molineux, I. J.
(2000) Computation, prediction, and experi-
mental tests of fitness for bacteriophage T7
mutants with permuted genomes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 97, 5375–5380.
113. Endy, D. (1997) Development and Application of a
Genetically Structured Simulation for
Bacteriophage T7, Ph.D. thesis, Dartmouth
College.
114. You, L. and Yin, J. (2001) Simulating the
growth of viruses. Pac. Symp. Biocomput.
532–543.
115. Nijhout, H. F. (2002) The nature of robustness
in development. Bioessays 24, 553–563.
116. Alon, U., Surette, M. G., Barkai, N., and
Leibler, S. (1999) Robustness in bacterial
chemotaxis. Nature 397, 168–171.
117. Morohashi, M., Winn, A. E., Borisuk, M. T.,
Bolouri, H., Doyle, J., and Kitano, H. (2002)
Robustness as a measure of plausibility in
models of biochemical networks. J. Theor. Biol.
216, 19–30.
118. Calson, J. M. and Doyle, J. (2000) Highly opti-
mized tolerance: robustness and design in com-
plex systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2529–2532.
119. Csete, M. E. and Doyle, J. C. (2002) Reverse
engineering of biological complexity. Science
295, 1664–1669.
120. Meir, E., von Dassow, G., Munro, E., and Odell,
G. M. (2002) Robustness, ﬂexibility, and the
role of lateral inhibition in the neurogenic net-
work. Curr. Biol. 12, 778–786.
121. You, L. (2002), The Extension, Application, and
Generalization of a Phage T7 Intracellular Growth
Model, Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI.
122. Gibson, G. (2002) Developmental evolution:
getting robust about robustness. Curr. Biol. 12,
R347–R349.
123. You, L. and Yin, J. (2002) Dependence of epis-
tasis on environment and mutation severity as
revealed by in silico mutagenesis of phage T7.
Genetics 160, 1273–1281.
124. Kobayashi, T., Chen, L., and Aihara, K. (2003)
Modeling genetic switches with positive feed-
back loops. J. Theor. Biol. 221, 379–399.
125. H asty, J., Dolnik, M., Rottschafer, V ., and
Collins, J. J. (2002) Synthetic gene network for
entraining and amplifying cellular oscillations.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 148101-1–148101-4.
126. Hasty, J., McMillen, D., and Collins, J. J. (2002)
Engineered gene circuits. Nature 420, 224–230.
127. Becskei, A., Seraphin, B., and Serrano, L.
(2001) Positive feedback in eukaryotic gene
networks: cell differentiation by graded to
binary response conversion. EMBO J. 20,
2528–2535.
128. Gardner, T. S., Cantor, C. R., and Collins, J. J.
(2000) Construction of a genetic toggle switch
in Escherichia coli. Nature 403, 339–342.
129. Elowitz, M. B. and Leibler, S. (2000) A synthetic
oscillatory network of transcriptional regula-
tors. Nature 403, 335–338.
130. Weiss, R. (2001) Cellular Computation and
Communications Using Engineered Genetic
Regulatory Networks, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Toward Computational Systems Biology 183
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004

===== PAGE 18 =====
131. Weiss, R. and Knight, T. (2000) Engineered com-
munications for microbial robotics, in 6th
International Workshop on DNA-Based Computers,
DNA 2000 (Condon, A., and Rozenberg, G.,
eds.) Leiden, The Netherlands, pp. 1–16.
132. Atkinson, M. R., Savageau, M. A., Myers, J. T.,
and Ninfa, A. J. (2003) Development of genetic
circuitry exhibiting toggle switch or oscillatory
behavior in Escherichia coli. Cell 113, 597–607.
133. Yokobayashi, Y., Weiss, R., and Arnold, F. H.
(2002) Directed evolution of a genetic circuit.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 16587–16591.
134. A rnold, F. H. and Moore, J. C. (1997)
Optimizing industrial enzymes by directed evo-
lution. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 58, 1–14.
135. Arnold, F. H. and Volkov, A. A. (1999) Directed
evolution of biocatalysts. Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol. 3, 54–59.
136. Hasty, J. (2002) Design then mutate. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 99, 16516–16518.
137. Mendes, P . (1997) Biochemistry by numbers:
simulation of biochemical pathways with
Gepasi 3. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22, 361–363.
138. Goryanin, I., Hodgman, T. C., and Selkov, E.
(1999) Mathematical simulation and analysis
of cellular metabolism and regulation.
Bioinformatics 15, 749–758.
139. T omita, M. (2001) Whole-cell simulation: a
grand challenge of the 21st century. Trends
Biotechnol. 19, 205–210.
140. Schaff, J., Fink, C. C., Slepchenko, B., Carson, J.
H., and Loew, L. M. (1997) A general computa-
tional framework for modeling cellular struc-
ture and function. Biophys. J. 73, 1135–1146.
141. Schaff, J. C., Slepchenko, B. M., and Loew, L.
M. (2000) Physiological modeling with virtual
cell framework. Methods Enzymol. 321, 1–23.
142. Shapir o, B. E., Levchenko, A., Meyerowitz,
E. M., Wold, B. J., and Mjolsness, E. D. (2003)
Cellerator: extending a computer algebra sys-
tem to include biochemical arrows for signal
transduction simulations. Bioinformatics 19,
677–678.
143. You, L., Hoonlor, A., and Yin, J. (2003)
Modeling biological systems using Dynetica—
a simulator of dynamic networks.
Bioinformatics 19, 435–436.
144. T omita, M., Hashimoto, K., Takahashi, K.,
Shimizu, T. S., Matsuzaki, Y., Miyoshi, F., et al.
(1999) E-CELL: software environment for
whole-cell simulation. Bioinformatics 15, 72–84.
145. Hucka, M., Finney, A., Sauro, H. M., Bolouri,
H., Doyle, J., and Kitano, H. (2002) The ERATO
Systems Biology Workbench: enabling interac-
tion and exchange between software tools for
computational biology. Pac. Symp. Biocomput.
450–461.
146. Bader, G. D., Donaldson, I., Wolting, C.,
Ouellette, B. F., Pawson, T., and Hogue, C. W.
(2001) BIND—The Biomolecular Interaction
Network Database. Nucleic Acids Res. 29,
242–245.
147. Xenarios, I., Salwinski, L., Duan, X. J., Higney,
P., Kim, S. M., and Eisenberg, D. (2002) DIP , the
Database of Interacting Proteins: a research
tool for studying cellular networks of protein
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 303–305.
148. Karp, P . D., Riley, M., Saier, M., Paulsen, I. T.,
Collado-Vides, J., Paley, S. M., et al. (2002) The
EcoCyc database. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 56–58.
149. Wixon, J. and Kell, D. (2000) The Kyoto ency-
clopedia of genes and genomes—KEGG. Yeast
17, 48–55.
150. Xenarios, I. and Eisenberg, D. (2001) Protein
interaction databases. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.
12, 334–339.
151. Lewin, B. (1997) Genes, ed. 6, Oxford
University, New York.
184 You
Cell Biochemistry and Biophysics Volume 40, 2004
