
===== PAGE 1 =====
© David Rickaby, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
Study 
Guide 
 
Systems 
Physiology

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Systems Physiology: Study Guide 
 
David Rickaby, PhD 
   
1. Homeostasis .................................................................................................. 1  
2. Transport across Cell Membranes ................................................................. 3 
3. Membrane Electrical Potentials .................................................................... 7 
Muscular System 
4. Skeletal Muscle ............................................................................................. 10 
5. Neurotransmitter Transmission & Smooth Muscle ....................................... 14 
Cardiovascular System 
6. The Heart ....................................................................................................... 17 
7. Hemodynamics .............................................................................................. 20 
8. Arteries, Capillaries and Veins ..................................................................... 22 
9. Control of Circulation ................................................................................... 25 
Urinary System 
10. Urine Formation .......................................................................................... 28  
11. Fluid and Electrolyte Balance ..................................................................... 32 
12. Blood ........................................................................................................... 35 
13. The Immune System .................................................................................... 39 
Respiratory System 
14. Pulmonary Ventilation and Perfusion ......................................................... 41 
15. Pulmonary Gas Exchange ........................................................................... 45 
16. Transport of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide .................................................. 48 
17. Control of Ventilation ................................................................................. 50 
18. Acid-Base Balance ...................................................................................... 53 
Nervous System 
19. Organization of the Nervous System........................................................... 55 
20. Special Senses: Vision ................................................................................ 58 
21. Hearing, Taste and Smell ............................................................................ 62 
22. Sensory Pathways ........................................................................................ 65 
23. Motor Pathways........................................................................................... 68 
24. The Brain ..................................................................................................... 71 
25. The Autonomic Nervous System ................................................................ 75 
Digestive System 
26. Transport and Digestion of Nutrients .......................................................... 78  
27. Absorption of Nutrients............................................................................... 81  
28. Digestive Wastes ......................................................................................... 85 
29. Metabolic Pathways .................................................................................... 87 
30. Energetics and Thermoregulation ............................................................... 91 
Endocrine System 
31. Hormone Characteristics ............................................................................. 93 
32. Hypothalamus, Pituitary and Thyroid Glands ............................................. 95  
33. Adrenal Glands and Pancreas ...................................................................... 98 
34. Parathyroid Glands and Bone Physiology ................................................... 101   
Reproductive System 
35. The Male Reproductive System .................................................................. 105 
36. The Female Reproductive System ............................................................... 108 
37. Pregnancy and Fetal Development .............................................................. 111 
38. Exercise Physiology .................................................................................... 114

===== PAGE 4 =====


===== PAGE 5 =====
1 
Systems Physiology: Study Guide 
 
David Rickaby, PhD 
 
© 2014
LESSON 1:  HOMEOSTASIS  
 
Human physiology is the study of how the 
human body functions as opposed to human  
anatomy, the study of the structure of the human 
body.  One might consider that the basic function of 
the human organism, and all other living things, is 
to maintain homeostasis. Homeo stasis is the 
condition of being in the optimal steady state.  
Disease follows directly from a loss of homeostasis. 
For example, consider the cell, the basic 
unit of life. While there are many kinds of cells, 
they all have certain functions in common. All 
living cells need to produce energy to stay alive.  
They all consume oxygen and carbohydrates and 
other nutrients for this purpose. All living cells are 
surrounded with a liquid extracellular fluid. For 
blood cells, this fluid is called plasma. For all other 
cells, it’s called interstitial fluid. The fluid within 
the cell (intracellular fluid) is called cytoplasm or 
cytosol. While extracellular and intracellular fluids 
are both mostly water, they do have important 
differences. Extracellular fluid has high 
concentrations of sodium ions, chloride ions and 
bicarbonate ions. Cytoplasm has more potassium 
ions, magnesium ions and phosphate ions. This 
"steady state" gradient of ions is maintained by 
every cell through the constant expenditure of 
cellular energy. If the ions were allowed to go to 
equilibrium, the cell would die.   
This is one of many examples of 
homeostasis. Maintaining normal blood pressure, 
normal blood oxygen concentration, and normal 
body temperature are others. The normal body 
temperature is about 98.6o F, and is maintained over 
a wide range of environmental temperatures . The 
body expends energy to maintain this constant 
internal temperature. After death, this "steady state" 
temperature will equilibrate with that of the 
environment.     
ORGAN SYSTEMS 
 The basic unit of life is the cell. Groupings 
of like cells  are called tissues. Different kinds of 
tissues combine to form organs. For example, the 
stomach has muscle tissue and nerve tissue and 
connective tissue and epithelial tissue. Groupings of 
organs that together are able to perform some 
homeostatic function are called organ systems .  
For example, the stomach combined with the 
esophagus, intestines, and other digestive organs, 
provides nutrients for the body. Put all the organ 
systems together and you have an organism. The 
human organ systems and their basic functions are 
listed below. 
 The Circulatory System  continuously 
replenishes the raw materials and removes waste 
products of cells. There are 25 trillion red blood 
cells carrying oxygen to me et the metabolic needs 
of the other 50 trillion to 75 trillion cells outside the 
circulatory system. Every living cell is within 25 to 
50 micrometers of a blood capillary. 
 The Respiratory System  brings oxygen 
into the body where it rapidly enters the bloo d.  
Without oxygen, cells cannot produce enough 
energy to sustain life functions. The respiratory 
system also transports carbon dioxide, a metabolic 
waste product, out of the body. 
 The Digestive System , as mentioned 
above, provides the body with basic nutrients.  
 The Musculoskeletal System  aids in the 
quest for survival by allowing communication, 
locomotion and internal and external movement.  
 The Urinary System , with its pair of 
kidneys, removes certain metabolic wastes from the 
body and keeps water and electrolytes in balance to 
control blood pressure. 
 The Nervous System  allows the body to 
perceive its environment and then to respond to 
conditions as necessary. Control involves a three -
step process. Sensory receptors (1) communicate 
information regarding conditions in the internal or 
external environment to the central nervous 
system, which (2) assesses the conditions and then 
(3) acts to modifiy them if necessary by stimulating 
motor effectors to respond with muscle contraction 
or gland secretion. 
 The Endocrine System, the other control 
system along with the nervous system,  exerts

===== PAGE 6 =====
2 
control by using blood-borne hormones to produce 
effects in target cells. 
 The Reproductive System  doesn't just 
provide homeostatic mechanisms for the organism, 
but it contributes to the survival of organisms in 
general because every organism will ultimately fail 
and new ones must take their place. 
CONTROL SYSTEMS OF THE BODY 
 The body relies on thousands of different 
control mechanisms. Control in the body is carried 
out by the nervous system  that is basically an 
electrochemical control system, and the endocrine 
system that is a chemical system. The degree of 
effectiveness of a control mechanism is measured in 
terms of gain. The higher the gain, the better the 
control.  Gain is directly related to the ability to 
correct deviation and inversely related to the 
amount of "error" that remains. Suppose, for 
example, blood pressure drops to 50 mmHg below 
normal. Homeostatic mechanisms are able to 
increase the pressure, subtracting 2 5 mmHg from 
the error (correction), but pressure is still 25 mmHg 
below normal (error). The gain is ( -25/25) or -1. 
The negative sign is characteristic of negative 
feedback control systems. Suppose blood pressure 
increases 30 mmHg above normal and the body 's 
homeostatic control mechanisms lower it 20 mmHg 
toward normal, the gain is:  
indicating better control than the first example..   
Most of the body’s control mechanisms 
involve negative feedback. "Negative" means that 
when something deviates from normal, the control 
mechanism causes it to reverse direction and move 
back toward normal. Consider a sudden loss of a 
liter of blood. That represents a loss of about 20% 
of the total blood volume. Initially, the output of the 
heart would fall below normal due to the reduced 
volume. The nervous system, sensing the reduced 
output, would stimulate the heart to contract harder 
and more frequently, bringing its output back up 
toward normal. 
Negative feedback is used to maintain 
normal body temperature with a gain of a bout -30, 
indicating it is much more efficient than the 
mechanism for blood pressure control described 
above. Compared to short -term control of blood 
pressure by the heart, long -term control of blood 
pressure by the kidneys is able to correct errors 
completely. That is to say, the control mechanisms 
of the kidneys have infinite gain.   
Only a few normal control mechanisms 
involve positive feedback; the correction and error 
moving in the same direction . Usually, positive 
feedback loops result in vicious cycles that severely 
disrupt homeostasis and often result in death. For 
example, consider a sudden loss of two liters of 
blood. Now the output of the heart falls by more 
than half. The nervous system responds, but 
because of the reduced blood flow to the heart  
muscle itself, the heart is not getting enough of the 
oxygen it needs to function. The heart weakens and 
pumps even less blood. Further reduction in blood 
flow results in less oxygen delivery and the heart 
weakens more. The output falls again making it 
even weaker, and so on until the vicious cycle 
causes it to fail completely.   
There are a few examples of positive 
feedback systems that lead to desirable outcomes.  
In childbirth, the pressure of the infant’s head 
against the cervix stimulates stretch rece ptors 
causing uterine contractions. The contractions 
increase the force exerted on cervix causing more 
intense stimulation. In response, contractions 
become stronger, and so on until the baby is born. 
 Another kind of control mechanism is feed 
forward. Thi s is an important mechanism for 
“programming” the brain.  An example is a medical 
student in surgical rotation making his/her first 
incision through skin.  How much pressure must be 
applied?  After the first attempt, the brain assesses 
the result. Excessiv e bleeding means too much 
pressure and less pressure will be applied on the 
next attempt. The brain goes forward and makes a 
"blind" attempt to correct it self on the next time 
around.
Gain = Correction
Error = –20
10 = –2

===== PAGE 7 =====
3 
LESSON 2:  TRANSPORT ACROSS CELL MEMBRANES 
 
The membrane that surroun ds living body 
cells is in the form of a fluid mosaic ; proteins 
floating in a phospholipid matrix. The membrane is 
a double layer of phospholipid with proteins on the 
surface, embedded in, or completely bridging the 
lipid portion.  Further, the proteins are  not 
stationary, but moving within the matrix (fluid). 
The structure of the cell membrane is also 
characteristic of the many organelles found within 
cells. The lipid nature of the membrane prevents it 
from dissolving in body fluids that are water-based. 
The membrane not only serves as a water-insoluble 
boundary, but also carries out considerable 
transport and metabolic activity.  Lipid soluble 
materials can pass through the lipid portion of the 
membrane, while water -soluble materials move 
through pores in t he proteins that penetrate the 
membrane. 
The concentrations of electrolytes and 
nutrients are usually different in the interstitial fluid 
than in the cytoplasm.  More sodium and chloride 
ions are found outside than inside the cell and more 
potassium and magnesium ions are found inside 
the cell. The cell membrane is responsible for 
maintaining these and other chemical gradients that 
are vital to the life of the cell. Molecules that are 
transported across the cell membrane use one or 
more of the transport mechanisms described below. 
PHYSICAL TRANSPORT  
 The three physical transport processes for 
consideration are diffusion, osmosis and filtration. 
These transport systems occur in both living and 
non-living systems and require no cellular energy 
(adenosine triphosphate, ATP). 
 Diffusion is the movement of particles 
from an area of higher concentration to an area of 
lower concentration as a result of the random 
motion of the dissolved particles. Particles move 
continuously across a freely permeable membrane 
in both directions, but net diffusion occurs from the 
side of high concentration to the side of low 
concentration. When the concentrations have 
reached equilibrium, movement across the 
membrane continues equally in both directions.    
 Lipid soluble molecules and very small 
neutral molecules can diffuse through the lipid 
portion of the membrane.  Charged molecules and 
large lipid insoluble molecules pass through the 
protein pores.  Passage of certain molecules through 
the pores is controlled by a part of the pr otein that 
acts as a gate, opening and closing the pore 
channel.  Gates open in response to voltage changes 
or ligand molecules binding to them.  This enables 
cells to control transport of certain molecules 
electrically or chemically. 
 As summarized in the  following equation, 
the rate of diffusion (D) changes directly with 
temperature (T), solubility (S), membrane surface 
area (A), and the magnitude of the concentration 
gradient (C 1-C2).  The diffusion rate is inversely 
related to the molecular weight (MW) of the 
particles and the thickness (d) of the membrane. 
(Molecular weight is a way of including the 
velocity of molecules. The velocity of a molecule’s 
random motion is inversely proportional to its 
molecular weight.)  
The gradient for diffusion need not b e a 
concentration gradient.  Diffusion can occur down 
pressure or electrical (charge) gradients as well.  
The distribution of many ions across the cell 
membrane is determined by a combination of these 
gradients. 
 In the body, blood carried to the lungs is 
high in CO 2 (carbon dioxide) but low in O 2 
(oxygen). Air inhaled into the lungs is rich in O 2 
with almost no CO2. When blood in the capillaries 
comes into close contact with the air spaces in the 
lungs, net diffusion of O 2 occurs into the blood 
while net diffusion of CO2 occurs into the air filling 
the lungs.   
EXAMPLE:  A U -tube is divided by a membrane 
permeable to both salt and water. Initially pure 
water is added to one side of the tube while 20% 
salt solution is added to the other. In time, we will 
find that both sides of the membrane have equal 
(10%) concentrations of salt. Net diffusion has 
occurred down the concentration gradient.  
Referring to the diagram above, more salt will 
move into the salt-free side than will move into the 
20% salt side.  More water will move into the 20%

===== PAGE 8 =====
4 
salt (80% water) side than will move into the salt -
free (100% water) side. When concentrations of salt 
on both sides are equal, the system is in the state of 
equilibrium and equal diffusion is occurring in 
both directions.   
 Facilitated diffusion is a special kind of 
diffusion found only in living cells.  Here, a protein 
carrier located within the cell membrane binds to 
the molecule and moves it across the membrane, 
releasing it on the other side. Glucose is carried 
across c ell membranes in this way. The carrier 
protein transports glucose from the side of high 
concentration to the side of low concentration. The 
lipid-insoluble glucose molecule is easily 
transported in this way. In facilitated diffusion, the 
carrier molecule is not able to transport molecules 
against a concentration gradient.   
 In simple diffusion, the rate of diffusion is 
directly proportional to the concentration gradient.  
In facilitated diffusion, the rate is proportional to 
the gradient only until the car rier mechanism is 
saturated.  Any further increase in the gradient does 
not increase the diffusion rate.  
 Osmosis is movement of water across a 
differentially permeable membrane, permeable to 
the water but not to the molecule dissolved in the 
water. Water moves from the side of greater water 
concentration to the side of lower water 
concentration. Because protein pores are selective 
and gated pores can open and close, the cell 
membrane is differentially permeable . In this 
situation, a concentration gradient  may be 
maintained across the membrane . All particles 
cannot move to a state of equilibrium.  Water 
diffusion under such conditions is called osmosis.   
EXAMPLE: If we divide a U -tube in half with a 
differentially permeable membrane such that it is 
permeable to water but not to salt, and then if we 
add a solution of 20% salt to one side and a salt -
free solution to the other side, we will discover that 
osmosis will cause a net movement of water toward 
the side with the greater concentration of 
impermeable particles (side containing 20% salt). 
In the example diagrammed below, the 
volume on the left side (the side that started at 20% 
salt, 80% water) will increase and the volume on 
the right side (that started at 0% salt, 100% water) 
will decrease.  The 20% salt  side has a greater 
osmotic pressure (water pulling power) than the 
salt-free side. The higher osmotic pressure of the 
high salt side is reflected by the fact that the side 
with salt is able to support the added weight of the 
rising column of fluid. The di fference between the 
levels of water on the two sides is a measure of 
osmotic pressure.  
If there is no difference in the osmotic 
pressure there will be no net movement of water to 
either side. T he system is isosmotic. If there is a 
difference in osmotic p ressure, the side with the 
greater osmotic pressure is called hyperosmotic 
relative to the side with lower osmotic pressure. 
The side with the lower osmotic pressure is called 
the hypoosmotic side. The net movement of water 
will be toward the hyperosmotic side, that being the 
side with the greater concentration of impermeable 
particles and the lower concentration of water. 
EXAMPLE: A solution of 0.9% sodium chloride 
(NaCl) is isosmotic to red blood cells. If we add red 
cells to a beaker of 3% NaCl (97% wate r), they 
crenate (shrink). The solution in the beaker is 
hyperosmotic to the blood cells. The blood cells are 
hypoosmotic to the solution in the beaker. Water 
moves down its concentration gradient. It moves 
out of the cells and the cells shrink.    
 What w ould happen to red blood cells 
placed into a beaker of pure water?  They will swell 
and perhaps even burst. This is called hemolysis.  
The water in the beaker is hypoosmotic to the red

===== PAGE 9 =====
5 
cells and the red cells are hyperosmotic to the water 
in the beaker. T he higher osmotic pressure inside 
the cells is reflected in the net movement of water 
into the cells. Water moving down its concentration 
gradient, moves into cell and causes it to hemolyze.  
  Clinically, solutions to be added to blood 
are made in isotonic concentrations. That is, they 
are made to become isosmotic when added to 
blood.  Isotonic saline is 0.9% NaCl. That is, 0.9% 
of the total volume of the salt -water solution is 
taken up by sodium chloride molecules. Osmotic 
pressure is determined by the number of 
impermeable particles. Since glucose molecules are 
much larger than sodium  and chloride molecules, 
the same number of glucose molecules added to the 
water would take up 5% of the total volume. A 5% 
glucose solution is, therefore, isotonic. 
 Filtration occurs when water and 
dissolved particles are pushed across a membrane 
by hydrostatic pressure. Movement is from the 
side with greater pressure to the side with lower 
pressure. Water and many kinds of dissolved 
particles are able to move across capillary walls by 
filtration.   
EXAMPLE:  If we pour a mixture of water, salt and 
charcoal into a funnel lined with filter paper, the 
water passes through and it tastes salty indicating 
the salt also passes through. The filter paper 
becomes black indicating tha t charcoal does not 
pass through. Observing the fluid dripping from the 
funnel, we see that the greater the quantity of fluid 
still in the funnel, the faster the rate of filtration.  
The force of gravity acting on a greater quantity of 
fluid above the filt er causes a greater hydrostatic 
pressure against the filter and increases the 
filtration rate. 
 In the kidney, some of the blood plasma 
and small molecules in the plasma are filtered into 
the urine. Blood cells and large protein molecules 
remain in the blood.  
PHYSIOLOGICAL TRANSPORT 
 In the body, certain concentration gradients 
must be maintained across the cell membrane.  
Diffusion alone would result in equal 
concentrations on both sides. This would disrupt 
homeostasis. Physiological processes can move 
molecules against a concentration gradient from 
the side of low concentration to the side high in 
concentration. In this way, concentration gradients 
across cell membranes can be maintained.  
However, this requires a constant expenditure of 
cellular energy (ATP). 
 The three physiological transport processes 
we will consider are active transport, endocytosis 
and exocytosis. These transport systems are unique 
to living systems and require cellular energy in the 
form of ATP. Most of the ATP is produced by the 
body is used to maintain the active transport pumps 
of its cells. 
 Active Transport is similar to facilitated 
diffusion in that the transported molecule binds to a 
carrier protein to be moved across the membrane 
and the transporters can saturate.  Unlike facilitated 
diffusion, movement can occur from the side of low 
concentration toward the side with high 
concentration and cellular energy is required. The 
energy is supplied by ATP. When ATP molecules 
are broken down to ADP, energy is released. The 
energy release occurs on the inner side of the cell 
membrane. The ADP returns to the mitochondria to 
be recharged into ATP again.   
 An example of active transport is the 
sodium-potassium exchange pump. Electrical 
impulses in nerves cells are the result of a sudden 
influx of sodium ions followed by an efflux of 
potassium ions. As generation of nerve impulses 
continues, the concentration of sodium ion inside

===== PAGE 10 =====
6 
cells and potassium ions outside cells would 
become too high and nerve activity would stop. 
Here, active transport moves sodium ions out of the 
cell to their already high extracellular concentration 
while moving potassium ions  into the cell. The 
normal gradients of sodium and potassium ions is 
restored.   
 Many protein carriers have receptors for 
two different molecules. The transport of one drives 
the transport of the other. If the receptors for the 
two molecules are on the same side of the protein, 
the two molecules are transported in the same 
direction. This is called co-transport. If the 
receptors are on opposite  sides, the two molecules 
will be transported in opposite directions. This is 
counter-transport. The exchange of sodium ions 
for potassium ions described above is an example 
of counter-transport. Here, using ATP for energy, 
the same protein carrier transpo rts three molecules 
of sodium ion out of the cell and two molecules of 
potassium ion into the cell. Only one molecule of 
ATP is required.  
 An example of co-transport is found in the 
absorption of nutrients from the gut. As we have 
seen, the concentration of sodium ions inside cells 
is very low. So sodium ions can be transported from 
the gut into the cells lining the gut by facilitated 
diffusion. The protein carrier for sodium ion also 
has a binding site for glucose molecules, so glucose 
is pulled into the  cell with sodium ions. As the 
concentration of glucose builds within the cell, a 
concentration gradient develops allowing glucose to 
move out the back of the cell and into the blood 
using facilitated diffusion. The only energy needed 
is that for the sodiu m-potassium exchange pump 
needed to maintain the low internal concentration 
of sodium ions.   
 Endocytosis is a mechanism for bringing 
material into the cell. It includes pinocytosis (that 
literally means “cell drinking”) for molecules and 
macromolecules a s large as proteins and 
phagocytosis (“cell eating”) where whole cells can 
be engulfed by certain other cells. 
 In endocytosis, cell membranes form 
themselves around a n extracellular molecules or 
cells, completely surrounding and then engulfing 
them. The m aterial inside the cell is now 
completely encased by a spherical vesicle made 
from cell membrane. ATP supplies the energy 
required for this process. 
 Endocytosis can be receptor -mediated. In 
one form of pinocytosis, for example, proteins may 
bind to receptor sites on the outer surface of the cell 
membrane. With the help of protein fibers on the 
inner surface of the membrane, pits form and the 
cell membrane surround s the bound proteins by 
moving up and over them, the edges of the 
membrane fusing when they meet.  
 Pinocytosis is a process occurring in all 
cells. Phagocytosis is not. Not every cell is a 
phagocyte. Certain white blood cells are able to 
remove bacteria and dead tissue from wounds using 
phagocytosis. A cellular organelle called a 
lysosome filled w ith hydrolytic enzymes moves 
toward the encapsulated mass; the membranes of 
the lysosome and vesicle fuse so that the enzymes 
now can digest the foreign material. 
 Besides certain white blood cells, 
phagocytes also include scavenger cells called 
macrophages. Macrophages wander through body 
tissues engulfing foreign cells and other unwanted 
materials as described above. 
 Exocytosis is a mechanism for moving 
molecules out of the cell. For example, some newly 
synthesized proteins are packaged into vesicles  of 
membrane by an organelle called the Golgi 
apparatus. At the periphery of the cell, the 
membrane of the vesicle can fuse with the cell 
membrane and the protein can leave the cell 
without disrupting the cell membrane’s barrier 
function. Similarly, the debris  left in the 
phagocytotic vesicle following digestion by 
lysosomes, is ejected from the cell by exocytosis.

===== PAGE 11 =====
7 
LESSON 3:  MEMBRANE ELECTRICAL POTENTIALS  
THE RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL 
 The gradient for diffusion need not be a 
concentration gradient. Diffusion can occur down 
an electrical gradient as well. For cells, the inside 
is negatively charged relative to the outside, due in 
part of high concentrations of negatively charged 
proteins inside cells. At equilibrium, neither the 
concentration nor the charge is equal on both sides. 
If we assume that the outside of the membrane is 
positively charged and the inside negatively 
charged, that the concentration of potassium ions is 
greater on the inside than on the outside and that 
potassium ions are freely permea ble to the 
membrane, then the concentration difference would 
favor movement of potassium ions from inside to 
outside, but the positively charged potassium ion 
would be repelled by the positive charges outside 
the membrane favoring movement to the inside.  At 
equilibrium, the concentration of potassium ions 
would remain higher on the inside, and the inside 
would remain negatively charged. If one knew the 
concentration of potassium inside and outside at 
equilibrium, one could calculate the electromotive 
force (EMF) in millivolts across the membrane at 
37oC (body temperature) using the Nernst 
equation for a positively charged ion: 
The EMF across a cell membrane is called a 
membrane potential. For a negative ion, the Nernst 
equation at 37oC becomes  
Below is a  table of concentrations and 
calculated Nernst p otentials for several ions 
associated with the cell membrane.  
Ion Inner Conc. Outer Conc. EMF 
 (mEq/L) (mEq/L) millivolts 
Potassium (K+) 140 4 -94 
Sodium (Na+) 14 142 +64 
Chloride (Cl-) 3.5 103 -90 
Using glass micropipettes filled with strong 
electrolyte solution and having tips less than a 
micrometer in diameter, it is possible to measure 
membrane potentials in single nerve fibers. The 
membrane potential for certain resting nerve fibers 
is -90 millivolt s.  That is, if the outside of the 
membrane is assumed to be 0 millivolts, the inside 
of the cell membrane is -90 millivolts.  Knowing 
the EMF, how does one interpret the EMF values in 
the table?  Two other techniques can be used to 
track the movement of i ons across a nerve cell 
membrane and help answer the question. 
 The Nernst equation assumes the ions are 
freely permeable to the membrane; that they are 
free to equilibrate. In fact, sodium ions are 100 
times less permeable than potassium ions and 
chloride ions half as permeable as potassium ions.  
 It makes sense, then, that the membrane potential is 
closer to that of potassium ion and chloride ion than 
to sodium ion. A model that takes into account the 
concentration gradient and permeability is 
described by Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz  equation: 
      The EMF calculated using the above 
equation is -86 millivolts.  This is less negative than 
the measured value of -90 millivolts.  This is due to 
the sodium-potassium electrogenic active transport 
pump. Using ATP fo r energy, this pump actively 
transports three positive sodium ions out of the cell 
for every two positive potassium ions it pumps in.  
The net loss of positive charges from the inside 
makes the membrane potential fall below the 
predicted -86 millivolts obt ained from the GHK 
equation. The measured value is -90 millivolts. That 
the chloride ion Nernst potential is exactly equal to 
the measured membrane potential is consistent with 
the fact that the very permeable chloride ion is 
distributed completely passive ly across the 
membrane.  
A stimulating electrode can be used along 
with the measuring electrode to "clamp" the EMF at 
a predetermined value.  This is the voltage clamp 
technique.  According to the Nernst equation, if the 
EMF is changed using the stimulating electrode, the 
ions will have to redistribute across the membrane 
to change the ratio of the concentration inside to the 
concentration outside appropriately. This becomes 
a tool that can be used to study ion fluxes. 
 It’s easy to change the electrolyte 
concentrations surrounding an isolated cell, but

===== PAGE 12 =====
8 
how could one make changes inside the cell? This 
can be done using the patch clamp technique. Here, 
a small "patch" of membrane can be sucked against 
the pipette tip and the voltage or ion concentration 
inside the pipette tip can be "clamped" at a 
predetermined value to study ion or voltage fluxes 
across a single protein channel.  When the cell 
membrane surrounding the patch is disrupted, the 
inner surface of the membrane patch is now 
exposed to the bathing solution.    
THE ACTION POTENTIAL 
 While the membrane potential is common 
to all living cells, certain types of cells can change 
the membrane potential as a means of 
communication. The ability to change membrane 
potentials and transmit those changes through  the 
cell is crucial to two cell types: nerve cells and 
muscle cells. The ions responsible for this change 
in potential are sodium and potassium ions.   
 The resting potential is due to the 
distribution of sodium and potassium ions across 
the membrane through leak channels according to 
the GHK equation and through the carrier proteins 
of the sodium-potassium pump, as described above. 
Another type of channel, the voltage gated  
channel, is responsible for the change in membrane 
potential associated with nerve and muscle.   
 Under the appropriate stimulus 
(mechanical, chemical or electrical stimulation of a 
nerve, for example) the membrane potential begins 
to become less negative. At a certain point (usually 
between -70 and -50 millivolts), the threshold of 
the sodium voltage gated channel is reached. The 
activation gate opens and suddenly the membrane 
permeability for sodium ions is 5 to 50 times 
greater than it is for potassium ions. As expected, 
according to the GHK equation, the increase in PNa 
causes the calculated EMF to approach the Nernst 
potential of sodium ions (+61 millivolts). In fact, 
the influx of positively charged sodium ions causes 
the measured membrane potential to reach about 
+35 millivolts before the inactivation gate of the 
sodium voltage gated channel closes and stops the 
influx of sodium ions. That is, the inside of the 
membrane is now 35 millivolts positive relative to 
the outside. This rapid reversal in membrane from 
negative to positive is called membrane 
depolarization. If the membrane p otential 
increases enough to open the sodium gates, it is said 
to have reached threshold. The action potential is 
then triggered in all-or-none fashion. Below 
threshold, there is no action potential.   
 The same increase in voltage that caused 
the opening of sodium voltage gated channels also 
causes the opening of potassium voltage gated 
channels.  However, these channels are slow, that 
is, slow to open.  In fact, their opening is delayed 
until after the sodium channels have already closed. 
 When the potass ium channels open, positively 
charged potassium ions flood out of the cell and the 
inside becomes negative once more. This is called 
membrane repolarization.   
 After repolarization, the membrane 
potential has returned to its resting state; the inside 
is negatively charged again.  
 As illustrated below, the cell membrane 
acts as an electrical capacitor.  Only the inside and 
outside edges are charged.  The rest of the 
cytoplasm and interstitial fluids are neutral.  
Therefore, only minute quantities of sodiu m and 
potassium ion that 
are adjacent to the 
cell membrane 
actually exchange 
during an action 
potential. The 
quantities are, in 
fact, so small that 
millions of action 
potentials can occur before it becomes necessary to 
reestablish the gradients.  This is a ccomplished by 
the sodium -potassium exchange pump mentioned 
above.  It is an active transport pump that requires 
ATP to drive it.

===== PAGE 13 =====
9 
 The depolarization process elevates the 
membrane potential of the cell membrane 
surrounding the point of stimulation enough  to 
elicit depolarization of the surrounding membrane.  
That, in turn, causes membrane adjacent to it to 
depolarize, and so on. The action potential 
propagates in all directions from the original point 
of stimulation until all the membrane has been 
depolarized. The wave of depolarization is followed 
in a fraction of a millisecond by a wave of 
repolarization. The propagated action potential is 
the nerve impulse.   
FACTORS AFFECTING ACTION POTENTIALS 
 Many nerve cells have processes that are 
many feet in leng th. For example, the nerve cells 
that innervate muscles in you toes, actually extend 
all the way down your leg from the spinal cord.    
Some of these long nerve cell processes are coated 
with a fatty substance called sphingomyelin 
(myelin). The coating is called the myelin sheath. 
 The substance acts like an electrical insulator.  
Along the length of the nerve process, the coating 
is interrupted with gaps called the nodes of 
Ranvier. When the action potential propagates 
down the long nerve process, only tho se areas at 
the nodes need to depolarize.  This greatly speeds 
the velocity of the action potential s. They literally 
"jump" down the membrane, a process called 
saltatory conduction.   Another factor that affects 
the velocity of the action potential is the diameter 
of the nerve process. Large diameter nerve 
processes conduct faster than small ones.  A small 
unmyelinated axon may conduct at less than a 
meter per second. A large myelinated fiber 
velocity may exceed 100 meters per second.  
 The action potentials of heart muscle cells 
are affected by a third voltage gated channel; the 
calcium channel . The calcium channel carries 
positively charged calcium ion (and a little extra 
sodium ion) into the cell just after depolarization.  
This acts to hold the inside po sitive for a longer 
time. The action potential has a positive plateau.  
Prolonging the depolarization enables the heart 
muscle cells to remain contracted for a longer 
period of time. The timeframe for single 
contractions of skeletal muscle cells is in 
milliseconds, whereas cardiac muscle cell 
contractions approach half a second in duration.  
Some action potentials repetitively 
discharge rhythmically.  Again, the heart is a good 
example.  In non -rhythmic nerves, the resting 
membrane potential remains at a co nstant value 
below threshold until a stimulus occurs.  In the 
heart, certain clusters of cells called pacemaker 
cells have cell membranes that slowly become more 
and more permeable to sodium ions, gradually 
bringing the membrane potential to threshold. That 
is, an increase in sodium permeability brings the 
membrane potential closer to the Nernst potential of 
sodium ion. Once threshold is reached, the 
membrane fires an all -or-none action potential.  
After repolarization, the increasing sodium ion 
permeability again brings the membrane potential 
toward threshold, and another impulse occurs.  This 
is the rhythmic nerve activity that triggers the 
repetitive rhythmic beating of the heart.  The 
electrical activity originates within the heart muscle 
itself.  Even i f all the nerves to the heart were cut 
(as during a heart transplant), the heart continues to 
beat rhythmically. 
 Electrolyte imbalances can interfere with 
the normal generation of action potentials. Calcium 
ions decrease the permeability of membranes for  
sodium ions. Therefore, higher than normal calcium 
ion concentration in the blood inhibits action 
potentials, depressing nerve reflexes while low 
calcium ion concentration excites the nervous 
system causing uncontrolled contractions.  Low 
extracellular pot assium ion concentration 
suppresses generation of action potentials 
potentially leading to paralysis. High extracellular 
potassium excites nerves by bringing the resting 
membrane potential toward threshold. But if 
threshold is exceeded, the nerve becomes 
permanently depolarized and nerve activity stops  
completely. As the heart stopped beating, death 
would follow rapidly.

===== PAGE 14 =====
10 
LESSON 4:  SKELETAL MUSCLE 
  
Nearly half the body weight is muscle.  
Muscle has the ability to contract and relax 
producing movement.  It moves the bones of the 
skeleton and moves materials through internal 
organs.  The three types of muscle are skeletal, 
smooth (also called visceral) and cardiac. 
SKELETAL MUSCLE 
 Skeletal muscle is made up of long, 
unbranched muscle fibers that generally run the full 
length of the muscle. Skeletal muscle fibers are 
striated. That is, alternating light and dark bands 
are visible in the cell when viewed under a 
microscope. Each cell has multiple nuclei located 
close to the outer cell membrane. In common w ith 
other types of muscle, skeletal muscle has a rich 
blood supply and the cells have abundant 
mitochondria for ATP production. (The terms 
muscle "cell" and muscle "fiber" are used 
synonymously.) 
 The muscle cell has several unique 
features. The cell membr ane of a muscle cell is 
called the sarcolemma. At regular intervals along 
the cell, this membrane penetrates into the interior 
of the cell forming a tubular channel passing all the 
way through. These penetrations are called 
transverse tubules. The cytoplas m of the muscle 
cell is called sarcoplasm. The endoplasmic 
reticulum, specialized in muscle cells as a reservoir 
for calcium ions, is called the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. On either end of the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum segments there are enlarged cavities 
called terminal cisternae.   
 The predominant organelle found in all 
muscle cells is the myofibril. Individual muscle 
cells have hundreds, even thousands of them. It is 
the myofibril that is responsible for the striations of 
skeletal muscle. In muscle cells, l ong parallel 
strands of myofibrils are surrounded by 
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Each myofibril is 
composed of a chain of individual units called 
sarcomeres. The sarcomere is the basic unit of 
muscle contraction. It is made up of alternating 
interlocking strands  of protein fibers actin and 
myosin. The figure shows diagrammatically the 
arrangement of the various components of the 
muscle cell. 
 Contraction is the result of the myosin 
molecules sliding over the actin molecules. In 
muscle contraction, the lengths of the actin and 
myosin fibers do not decrease. Rather, actin and 
myosin fibers bind to each other and then slide over 
each other, shortening the sarcomere. Individual 
contractions of skeletal muscle are very rapid. A 
contraction lasts less than a tenth of a second. 
SLIDING FILAMENT MECHANISM 
 In the muscle, an electrical impulse (action 
potential) alters membrane permeability and causes 
calcium (Ca++) ions to be released from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum and terminal cisternae. The 
calcium ions bind to a protein on the actin molecule 
called troponin. Attached to the troponin is short 
protein fiber called tropomyosin. Without calcium 
ions bound to troponin, the tropomyosin is 
positioned such that it blocks the binding of actin 
and myosin and contraction cannot oc cur. When 
calcium ions bind to troponin, troponin changes its 
molecular conformation and the attached 
tropomyosin is pulled out from between actin and 
myosin. The actin and myosin molecules then are 
able to bind forming cross-bridges.   
 On the head of the  myosin molecule, the 
point where it binds to actin, is a molecule of 
ATPase, the enzyme that releases the energy stored 
in ATP. ATP binds to myosin as the previous cross-
bridge breaks and is then broken down into ADP 
and P i (inorganic phosphate) even befo re myosin 
and actin bind.  The energy released is stored in the 
myosin head like a cocked spring.  When the next 
cross-bridge forms, the energy is immediately 
released causing the myosin head to flex and pull 
itself over the surface of the actin fibers, shortening 
the muscle. Another ATP binds, breaking the cross-
bridge, and the process repeats.  Reabsorption of

===== PAGE 15 =====
11 
calcium ions into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and 
binding of another ATP to myosin breaks the cross-
bridges and the muscle relaxes. 
 The figure abo ve illustrates the relative 
positions of the four proteins of the myofibril both 
before (left) and after (right) the introduction of 
calcium ions. 
 For the muscle to relax, calcium ions must 
be returned to the sarcoplasmic reticulum.   This is 
accomplished by an active transport calcium pump 
that also requires energy.  So ATP is required both 
for contraction and relaxation.  A contracted muscle 
deprived of ATP cannot relax. After death, for 
example, contracted muscles can remain contracted 
for several days until the structural integrity of the 
cell deteriorates.  This is called rigor mortis. 
ENERGY FOR CONTRACTION 
 Energy is required for the sliding filament 
mechanism.  That energy comes from ATP. The 
ATP is supplied from three main sources: 
1. Creatine phosphate, found inside muscle cells , 
reacts with ADP to yield ATP plus free creatine. 
Creatine phosphate is rapidly used up, providing 
energy for about ten seconds of strenuous exercise.  
2. Glycogen, a carbohydrate stored in muscle cells, 
can be metabolized to pyruvic acid or lactic acid in 
the sarcoplasm.  The reaction doesn't require 
oxygen, but produces less than 5 % as much ATP 
as is produced in the mitochondria. The glycogen 
stores can provide sufficient ATP to last for about a 
minute or so.  
 These fir st two sources of ATP require 
only the resources found within the cell. The third 
mechanism requires that both glucose and oxygen 
be continuously delivered to the cell through the 
bloodstream.  
3. Pyruvic acid is catabolized (broken down) in the 
presence o f oxygen (aerobic respiration) in the 
mitochondria. Pyruvic acid is provided by 
anaerobic metabolism of glycogen or glucose 
coming from outside the cell. Glucose can be 
provided from carbohydrates or synthesized from 
proteins or fats. Fats are a particular ly rich source 
of energy. ATP provided by the mitochondria can 
sustain muscle activity indefinitely, provided 
sufficient oxygen and glucose are available.   
 During severe exercise, increased blood 
flow may not be able to supply enough oxygen to 
muscle cells.  The aerobic production of ATP in 
mitochondria cannot continue.  The concentration 
of lactic acid in the sarcoplasm increases rapidly.  
The lactic acid accumulation inside muscle cells 
causes the pain associated with muscle fatigue.  
Lactic acid can be  converted back to a fuel for 
aerobic ATP production if enough oxygen is 
supplied.  This usually occurs after the exercise, but 
while we're still breathing heavily. Some of the 
ATP produced is used to recharge the creatine 
phosphate stores that are also de pleted by fatigue.  
The amount of oxygen required to recharge the 
muscle is called the oxygen debt .  Increased 
ventilation even after exercise has ended provides 
the oxygen necessary to pay back the oxygen debt. 
MUSCLE TONE 
 Tone refers to the internal tension within a 
resting muscle caused by the overlap of actin and 
myosin molecules. There is a relationship between 
the maximum tension that can develop in a 
contracting muscle and the length of that muscle 
before contraction. For example, if a resting muscle 
were stretched to a resting length such that the actin 
and myosin filaments did not overlap, contraction 
could not occur. Without overlap, crossbridges 
cannot form. It has been shown that when resting 
sarcomere length is about 2 micrometers, the 
strength of contraction will be maximal. Muscles 
cells develop to a length that results in optimal 
sarcomere length.

===== PAGE 16 =====
12 
 When a muscle contracts against a load that 
is too great for it to move, it cannot shorten. It 
nevertheless develops increased internal tension in 
an effort to shorten. This is known as an isometric 
("same length") contraction. The length of the 
muscle remains the same while internal tension 
increases. When a muscle actually moves a load, it 
shortens in length, allowing the internal tension to 
remain the same. This is an isotonic ("same 
tension") contraction.   
SINGLE MUSCLE TWITCH RESPONSE 
 If a muscle is to contract, it must be 
stimulated.  The stimulation is the electrical 
event (depolarization). It takes only a few 
milliseconds for the stimulat ion to travel to 
and through the muscle, for the calcium ions 
to be released, and for the actin and myosin 
to bind before the mechanical event 
(contraction) occurs. This brief time is called 
the latent period. The muscle cell polarity 
returns to resting co ndition (repolarization) 
and shortly thereafter, the muscle tension 
returns to the resting state (relaxation). The 
electrical events occur before the mechanical 
events. 
 For a short time after application of a 
stimulus, the muscle is in an absolute refractory 
period.  During this period, the contraction of the 
muscle cannot be altered by additional stimuli no 
matter how strong.  After the absolute refractory 
period, a sufficiently strong stimulation can cause 
the muscle to contract again even before it is 
completely relaxed.   
SUMMATION, TETANY AND FATIGUE 
 Repeated stimulation following the 
refractory period but before the muscle is fully 
relaxed produces contractions that are stronger than 
those a simple twitch would produce. The 
contraction resulting fro m the second stimulation 
adds to the contraction from the first stimulation.  
This is called summation. The tension builds 
because the sarcomeres have not moved completely 
apart to the resting position before the second 
contraction began. 
 If stimulations are given with extreme 
rapidity (very high frequency) the muscle cannot 
relax at all between successive stimuli. The 
individual contractions become indistinguishable 
and fuse into a single sustained contraction, a 
phenomenon known as tetany. The idea is to  send 
stimuli so frequently that just before the muscle 
begins to relax, it gets stimulated again. With time, 
the maximum tension generated during tetany may 
decline as ATP stores are exhausted. This is 
fatigue. 
 The smooth, sustained movements of our 
skeletal muscles are the result of tetanic 
contractions. Twitch contractions are rare. An 
example of a twitch response is the blink of an 
eyelid. 
 Sometimes the initial contractions of a cold 
muscle are of a diminished intensity. After several 
contractions, the muscle is at peak intensity. The 
muscle had to "warm up". This phenomenon is 
called treppe.  Limbering up before exercise helps 
to bring all muscles to maximum efficiency.

===== PAGE 17 =====
13 
THE MOTOR UNIT 
 A single nerve fiber and all the muscle 
fibers (cells) it innervates are called a motor unit.  
For very delicate movements, a nerve fiber may 
send branches to only a few muscle cells.  For 
example, to produce the delicate movements of the 
eyes, the motor units need only a few fibers each.  
For coarse movements produced by the leg muscles, 
for example, fifty or a hundred muscle fibers may 
be innervated by a single nerve cell.  When that 
nerve depolarizes, it causes all muscle cells of the 
motor unit to contract. 
GRADING MUSCLE CONTRACTIONS 
 A stimulus of a certain strength will 
contract a whole muscle to a certain tension. As the 
stimulus strength is increased, the tension generated 
in the muscle also increases until the maximum 
contraction is achieved. Each motor unit in the 
muscle has its own threshold for firing. Some motor 
units need only a weak stimulus, some need a 
stronger one. Increasing the strength of the stimulus 
causes more motor units to fire and results in a 
stronger contraction. Weak stimuli will not elicit 
any response if they are below the threshold of all 
the motor units. As the stimulus strength increases, 
the thresholds of more and more motor units are 
reached. More motor units fire causing greater and 
greater contraction strength. At some stimulus 
intensity, all motor units of the muscle are activated 
and the muscle contracts with its maximum 
strength. Increasing the intensity of stimulation  
above that required to fire all the motor units cannot 
increase the strength of contraction because all 
muscle cells are now contracting; there are no more 
inactivated motor units available. To lift a light 
load, the nervous system stimulates only a few 
motor units in a given muscle. To lift a heavy load, 
the nervous system activates more and more motor 
units until the load is lifted. If all motor units are 
active and the load still can't be moved, the muscle 
just isn't strong enough. 
RIGOR MORTIS 
After death, the muscles can remain in a 
contracted state for up to a day or more depending 
on environmental conditions (temperature). This is 
because it not only takes ATP to  allow muscles to 
contract; it also takes ATP to allow them to relax. 
 Without ATP to break cross -bridges between 
actin and myosin and to supply energy for active 
transport to pump calcium ions out of the 
sarcoplasm and back into the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, the cross -bridges remain intact. The 
binding of actin and myosin, in the presence of 
calcium ion, form s cross-bridges that “lock” the 
filaments together . This is just a spontaneous 
chemical reaction. Without ATP, calcium ion 
cannot be removed to allow th e filaments to 
unlock, and the myosin head cannot flex to pull 
itself along the actin (contraction). Only after the 
muscle proteins begin to decompose under the 
action of enzymes released from the rupturing 
lysosomes, will the muscle tissue relax.  This st ate 
of tonic contracture after death is called rigor 
mortis.

===== PAGE 18 =====
14 
LESSON 5:  NEUROMUSCULAR TRANSMISSION & SMOOTH MUSCLE 
 
SYNAPSES 
 Nerve cells have long processes extending 
off the main portion of the cell. The main part of 
the cell, containing the nucleus, is called the nerve 
cell body or soma.  Processes that conduct impulses 
toward the cell body are called dendrites.  
Processes that transmit impulses away from  the 
cell body are called axons. The processes transmit 
action potentials from one end of the cel l to the 
other.  If the combined stimuli coming in from other 
nerve cells along the dendrites and cell bodies of a 
given neuron are strong enough, the cell membranes 
of that neuron will depolarize.  The resulting action 
potential is transmitted down the ax on toward 
another nerve fiber or a muscle fiber.   
An impulse reaching the tip of the axon 
cannot be electrically transmitted to another nerve 
cell or to a muscle cell. The cells communicate with 
each other chemically. A transmitter substance is 
synthesized in vesicles found in the terminal part of 
the axon. At the junction of a nerve cell with the 
muscle cell, or with a dendrite or the body of 
another nerve cell, there is a gap called a synapse.  
As mentioned, action potentials in the presynaptic 
fiber ca nnot cross to the postsynaptic fiber 
electrically. Rather, action potentials in the 
presynaptic fiber stimulate the presynaptic fiber to 
release the transmitter substance. This substance is 
carried across the synapse and binds to receptors on 
the postsynap tic cell. If sufficient transmitter is 
released and comes in contact with the receptors, 
the chemically stimulated postsynaptic cell will 
depolarize and an action potential is generated. The 
action potential then propagates across the entire 
postsynaptic cell. 
 At the neuromuscular junctions of skeletal 
muscle, the action potential in the presynaptic nerve 
stimulates hundreds of vesicles on the nerve 
endings to release the transmitter substance 
acetylcholine that diffuses across the synapse. On 
the muscle side, acetylcholine binds to receptors on 
the surface of the sarcolemma. These receptors are 
associated with sodium channels. The channels are 
referred to as ligand gated channels. As ligands 
(acetylcholine molecules in this case) bind, more 
and more sodium ion is gated into the muscle cell, 
raising the membrane potential toward threshold.  
When threshold is reached, the membrane 
depolarizes. The enzyme acetylcholinesterase that 
is produced by the muscle cell membrane then 
breaks down the acetylcholine so that if the muscle 
is to stay contracted, the nerve cell must continue to 
fire action potentials at high frequency to continue 
supplying new chemical transmitter. When the 
nerve stops firing and the last of the acetylcholine is 
broken down, the muscle cell will relax.   
The disease myasthenia gravis  is 
characterized by muscle weakness due to damaged 
acetylcholine receptors on the muscle cells. 
 
Membrane Sodium Ion Channels 
Channel type Characteristic 
Leak  Channels for diffusion of ions with 
distribution de termined by the 
GHK equation.  
Ligand-gated Channels open when activated by 
a chemical neurotransmitter such 
as acetylcholine. 
Voltage-gated Channel opens as voltage is 
raised by the electrical activity of 
an approaching nerve impulse. 
Accounts for the a bility of action 
potentials to be conducted. 
Na+/K+ Counter-transport that removes 
Na+ from the interior of the cell 
following depolarizations. Three 
Na+ leave for every two K + that 
enter the cell.

===== PAGE 19 =====
15 
The action potential stimulated in the 
muscle cell qu ickly passes across the entire 
sarcolemma, then down into the transverse tubules 
deep into the cell. It is passed directly to the 
membranes of the terminal cisternae that are 
adjacent to the transverse tubules, and then to the 
rest of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Calcium ions are 
then released from these membranous structures 
and diffuse into the sarcoplasm that bathes the 
myofibrils. This process is called excitation-
contraction coupling . The calcium binds to 
troponin, pulling the tropomyosin away so actin and 
myosin cross -bridges can form. The actin and 
myosin slide over each other and the sarcomeres 
shorten.  ATP supplies the energy for contraction. 
 When the stream of nerve impulses stop, 
the muscle will relax. Calcium ions are pumped (by 
active transport  requiring ATP) back into the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum and terminal cisternae.  
Without calcium  ion, the troponin moves 
tropomyosin back into its blocking position, 
breaking the cross -bridges and the sarcomeres 
relax. 
 Synapses are not unique to neuromuscula r 
junctions. They are found between adjacent nerve 
fibers as well. Action potentials cannot cross nerve-
nerve junctions either. Presynaptic nerves release 
neurotransmitter substances to stimulate the 
postsynaptic nerves. Some use acetylcholine. Some 
use on e of the other two dozen or so known 
neurotransmitters.  
NERVE SUPPLY TO MUSCLE TISSUE 
 The central nervous system monitors the 
state of contraction of each muscle through sensory 
nerve impulses originating from stretch receptors in 
the muscles themselves. The ability to perceive the 
state of contraction of a muscle is called 
proprioception. The impulses necessary for a 
muscle to contract are sent from the central nervous 
system by action potentials through motor nerves. 
When the brain decides how much a mu scle needs 
to be contracted, it checks the proprioceptors to 
determine how much it's already contracted, then 
sends motor impulses to change the degree of 
contraction appropriately.  The communication with 
proprioceptors is so rapid that the nervous system is 
able to make adjustments to contractions as they are 
happening. Proprioceptors also help us to perceive 
our orientation in the surrounding environment.  
SMOOTH MUSCLE 
 There are two types of smooth muscle : 
multiunit and single-unit. We will consider only the 
single-unit muscle, also called visceral muscle 
because it composes the large muscles associated 
with the visceral organs (except the heart).  Most 
smooth muscle is of this type.  It is called “single 
unit” or “unitary” because stimulation causes 
groups of muscle cells to contract as a single unit.  
Multiunit muscles are very small and found 
only is a few places in the body. Like skeletal 
muscle, each cell acts independently and requires 
its own stimulus. The small muscles in the interior 
of the eye and muscles associated with hair follicles 
of the skin (goose bumps) are multiunit muscles. 
Single unit smooth muscle is composed of 
tapered cells, much shorter and smaller than 
skeletal muscle cells.  
Each cell has a single 
central nucleus.  The 
myofibrils are arranged 
randomly along the 
length of the fibers, so 
the cells do not appear 
striated.  In visceral 
muscle, the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum is less well 
developed than in 
skeletal muscle.  Some 
cells almost totally lack 
sarcoplasmic reticulum.  
The calci um ion 
transport function is therefore taken over by the 
sarcolemma. That is, to relax the muscle, calcium 
ions are pumped completely out of the muscle cells.  
SMOOTH VS. SKELETAL MUSCLE  
 Smooth muscle cells are elongated - fat in 
the middle and tapering t o points on either end. 
Cells are coupled to each other by gap junctions. 
These are membrane openings between cells that 
allow ion fluxes (electrical activity) to be conducted 
from cell to cell. Actions potentials are conducted 
from cell to cell electrical ly across electrical, and 
not chemical, synapses. Because they are coupled 
electrically, hundreds or even millions of cells can 
contract together (as a single unit = “unitary”).  
Smooth muscle cells are connected to each 
other by mechanical coupling. Cells are physically 
connected to each other such that they pull together.

===== PAGE 20 =====
16 
While contractile elements are composed of 
interlocking actin and myosin strands, the filaments 
are not arranged in parallel strands, as in skeletal 
muscle. Rather, the filaments are arranged in a grid 
pattern, like a three -dimensional hair net. Actin 
filaments are supported on one end by dense bodies 
dispersed throughout the cell or attached to the cell 
membrane. The free end slides across myosin 
filaments, pulling the dense bodies toget her as the 
cell shortens.  
Calcium ion is required for contraction of 
both skeletal and visceral muscle, but the initiation 
of cross-bridge formation is different.  In visceral 
muscle, a calcium ion binds to a molecule called 
calmodulin that then activates the enzyme myosin 
kinase to initiate cross-bridge formation.  Once the 
cross-bridge between actin and myosin is 
established, it remains fixed until enzymatically 
broken. This is referred to as the “ latch” 
phenomenon. To relax the muscle, another enzyme, 
myosin phosphatase, is required to break the bond. 
Thus, the actin and myosin cross -bridges are 
sustained for a much longer period of time in 
visceral muscle compared to skeletal muscle. In 
skeletal muscle, crossbridges are broken and 
reformed during the en tire time the muscle cell is 
contracted. The muscle contractions of smooth 
muscle last for two or three seconds. That’s about 
20 times longer than in skeletal muscle. To work 
over a given length of time, therefore, visceral 
muscle requires significantly less ATP than skeletal 
muscle, since ATP is required only to initiate cross-
bridges, not to sustain them.   
 Visceral muscle can maintain constant 
force over different lengths by stress-relaxation. As 
a hollow organ (such as the stomach or urinary 
bladder) fills, the pressure inside would be expected 
to increase. The muscles in the wall, now under 
stress, relax just enough to allow the organ to 
enlarge and maintain constant pressure. 
 Unlike skeletal and cardiac muscle, visceral 
muscle cells can divide to increase muscle mass. An 
example is uterine smooth muscle mass that 
increases greatly during pregnancy as the muscle 
cells divide. 
CONTROL OF VISCERAL MUSCLE 
 While skeletal muscle is under voluntary 
control, v isceral muscle is under involuntary 
control. Contractions are initiated below our level 
of consciousness. The branch of the nervous system 
that controls involuntary muscle is the autonomic 
branch. Voluntary skeletal muscle is controlled by 
the somatic nervous system. (The details of the 
somatic and auton omic nervous systems will be 
discussed later.) Autonomic control usually 
involves dual innervation. One nerve synapses with 
the muscle and releases a transmitter that causes 
contraction; another nerve synapses and releases a 
different transmitter that inhibits contraction . In 
skeletal muscle, every muscle synapses with an 
axon that stimulates it to contract. In visceral 
muscle, not every muscle cell requires a nerve 
stimulation to contract. Nerve fibers spread over a 
sheet muscle cells, not actually forming  a synapse 
with every cell. With gap junctions, they don’t need 
to. The stimulation of one cell can cause those 
around it to contract as well. In fact, visceral 
muscles can contract without any nerve stimulation. 
 Many visceral muscles respond to humoral 
(chemical) stimulation. For example, in the lungs, 
smooth muscle in the walls of blood vessels 
contract in response to lower than normal tissue 
oxygen levels. This acts to reduce flow to those 
parts of the lung obviously not receiving as much 
oxygen from th e air for some reason. In skeletal 
muscles, low oxygen levels cause smooth muscle in 
the walls of blood vessels to relax- just the opposite 
of the response in the lung. In this case, low oxygen 
signals the need for more oxygen delivery, so 
vessels dilate providing added blood flow.  
Hormones can also control visceral 
muscles.  An example of this occurs in the uterus 
during pregnancy. The hormone progesterone 
inhibits contraction of uterine smooth muscle 
during pregnancy, preventing spontaneous abortion 
of the developing fetus. But at the time of labor and 
delivery, progesterone levels fall and another 
hormone called oxytocin is released from the 
pituitary gland. Oxytocin stimulates contraction of 
uterine smooth muscle as part of the birth process. 
 Just stretching a visceral muscle can cause 
it to contract.  When the wall of the small intestine 
is stretched near its maximum by the food entering, 
the muscles will reflex ively contract, forcing the 
contents to the next segment.  In this way, food is 
passed from one segment to the next.

===== PAGE 21 =====
17 
LESSON 6:  THE HEART
 
The circulatory system consists of a pump 
and system of vessels that carry blood to and from 
the cells of the body.  The heart is the pump, 
forcing blood into arteries. Arteries are the 
distribution vessels.  From arteries, blood flows into 
the capillaries, the exchange vessels.  Veins 
receive blood from the capillaries.  They are 
collection vessels that carry blood back to the heart. 
 The heart is a double pump, pumping blood 
simultaneously to the lungs with the right chambers 
and the rest of the body with the left chambers.  
Blood, low in oxygen, is pumped from the right 
heart into the pulmonary artery that branches to the 
lungs.  There the blood is oxygenated.  Blood rich 
in oxygen returns to the left heart  through 
pulmonary veins and is pumped into the aorta.  
After circulating through the systemic capillaries, it 
returns to the right heart through the vena cavae to 
be pumped to the lungs again.  Cardiac muscle is 
responsible for the pumping action of the heart. 
CARDIAC MUSCLE 
 Cardiac muscle is striated like skeletal 
muscle but under control of the involuntary nervous 
system, as is visceral muscle.  Cardiac muscle cells 
are branching cells arranged end to end or end to 
side.  This arrangement of muscle cells results in a 
squeezing action forcing blood from the heart.  
Cardiac muscle has intercalated discs at the cell 
boundaries that serve to decrease electrical 
resistance between cells.  Because of gap junctions 
in the discs, action potentials are transferre d from 
cell to cell electrically with no chemical transmitter 
substance release across synapses required.  As a 
result, many individual muscle cells contract 
together as one integrated unit.  Cardiac muscle 
myofibrils are arranged to give the striated 
appearance.   
 Cardiac muscle contracts more rapidly than 
visceral muscle but more slowly than skeletal 
muscle, contractions lasting a little less than 0.5 
seconds.   Cardiac muscle is under involuntary 
neural control.  But nerve impulses do not initiate 
contractions.  Contractions originate from within 
the muscles themselves; the contractions are 
myogenic (born in the muscle).  Specialized cells 
within the heart (called pacemaker cells) discharge 
spontaneously and rhythmically.  The autonomic 
nerves to the hea rt only control the heart rate and 
strength of the contractions.  Even if all nerves to 
the heart were cut (as occurs in heart transplants), 
the heart still continues to beat.  
 Blood flow through the four chambers of 
the heart is illustrated in the figure.  [Structures are 
numbered sequentially with the flow direction.]  
 The right chambers carry deoxygenated 
blood.  A series of heart valves keep the blood flow 
unidirectional.  They open and close passively in 
response to the pressure differentials caused by 
contraction and relaxation of the myocardium.  The 
tricuspid valve, also called the right AV 
(atrioventricular) valve, has three flaps.  The 
bicuspid, also called the left AV or mitral valve, 
has two flaps.  The AV valves are supported by 
chordae tendineae.  These strong, fibrous strands 
are in turn attached to papillary muscles of the 
ventricular walls.  Blood flowing out of the atria 
causes the AV valves to open into the ventricles.  
Blood trying to reflux into the atria pushes the 
valves closed.  The chordae tendineae prevent the 
valves from opening backwards into the atria.  The 
pulmonary and aortic semilunar valves do not 
require this extra support. Their cup-like attachment 
to the vessel walls prevents them from opening in 
the wrong direction.  Valv es of this type are also 
found at regular intervals throughout the venous 
system helping to maintain unidirectional venous 
return toward the heart.   
 The valve action of the heart is totally 
passive. Valves open and close properly even 
during external or internal cardiac massage.

===== PAGE 22 =====
18 
Valvular insufficiency results when any valve fails 
to close completely.  Some backflow can then 
occur.  In many instances, it is necessary to replace 
the defective valve with a prosthesis. Mitral 
stenosis, for example is the det erioration and 
scarring of the mitral valve. The valve can't close 
tightly. As a result, the ventricular contraction 
forces blood back into the left atrium, and increases 
blood pressure in the pulmonary veins and 
capillaries.  The high pressure results in pulmonary 
edema (a fluid accumulation) in the lungs.  The 
right ventricle that must now pump blood to the 
lungs against this elevated pressure begins to 
enlarge.  Unchecked, mitral stenosis can lead to 
right heart failure and death.  
PACING CARDIAC ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY 
 A third voltage-gated channel, the calcium 
channel, affects action potentials in the cardiac 
muscle cells of the heart.  The calcium channel 
carries positively charged calcium (and some 
sodium ions) into the cell just after depolarization.  
This acts to hold the inside positive for a longer 
time.  The action potential has a positive plateau.  
Prolonging the depolarization enables heart muscles 
to remain contracted longer. 
 Action potentials in the pacemaker cells of 
the heart repetitively di scharge rhythmically.  In 
non-rhythmic nerve and muscle cells, the resting 
membrane potential remains at a constant value 
somewhere below threshold until a stimulus occurs. 
In the pacemaker cells and electrical conducting 
cells of the heart (discussed belo w), the cell 
membrane is more permeable to sodium ion . As 
sodium ion leaks into the cells, the resting 
membrane potential gradually becomes less 
negative, creeping toward threshold .  Once 
threshold is reached, the membrane fires an all -or-
none action poten tial.  After repolarization, the 
process repeats, bringing the membrane potential 
slowly toward threshold again, and another impulse 
occurs.  This is the rhythmic nerve activity that 
triggers the rhythmic beating of the heart.      
 The electrical pacemaker of the heart is the 
sinoatrial (SA) node found in the right atrium near 
the opening of the superior vena cava.  The SA 
node depolarizes spontaneously, establishing the 
rate of the heart (about 70 beats per minute at rest). 
The depolarization spreads through the heart along 
the pathway indicated by arrows in the figure 
below. Near the interventricular septum (ventricular 
wall separating the two ventricular chambers) is the 
atrioventricular (AV) node.  If the SA node is 
damaged, the AV node can pace the hea rt.  Its rate 
is about 50 beats per minute.  Impulses from the 
AV node are carried down the interventricular 
septum by special conducting fibers called the 
bundle of His  that soon split s into right and left 
bundle branches traveling down to the apex and 
then up through the outer walls of the heart.  
Numerous small 
fibers called 
Purkinje fibers  
branch off the 
bundle branches 
carrying the 
nerve impulses 
deep into the 
myocardial 
tissue to the 
muscle cells.  
 While the actual stimulus for contraction 
originates within the nodal tissue itself (the heart is 
myogenic), the rate and strength of contraction can 
be controlled by the autonomic nervous system.  As 
was the case in visceral muscle, cardiac muscle is 
dually innervated. There are nerves to stimulate the 
heart and nerves to inhibit it. The sympathetic 
branch of the autonomic nervous system increases 
heart rate and strength of contraction while the 
parasympathetic branch decreases heart rate and 
contraction strength.  Cardiac activity can also be 
controlled wi th hormones. The hormone 
epinephrine from the adrenal gland, for example, 
has an effect similar to that of the sympathetic 
nerves. It stimulates the heart.

===== PAGE 23 =====
19 
THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM (ECG, EKG) 
 Because 
the electrical 
currents within the 
heart move 
according t o the 
very regular 
pattern described 
above, and 
because body 
tissue is a good 
conductor of 
electrical activity, 
we can observe the 
pattern of 
electrical activity in the heart by placing sensitive 
recording electrodes on the skin surface. Placing 
electrodes in the same positions on different 
patients produces ECGs having very similar 
patterns. Changing positions of the electrodes 
changes the shapes of the ECG waveform, but the 
same waves still appear. In the ECG work -up, an 
array of ten electrodes is placed over and around 
the heart as shown in the figure.  The 
electrocardiograph unit alternates between 
electrodes to produce 12 different ECG patterns.  
The typical Lead II pattern, obtained by activating 
the negative electrode of the right arm and 
positive electrode of the left leg, is shown below. 
 In the ECG, the P wave  occurs during 
depolarization of the atria.  The QRS complex 
corresponds to ventricular depolarization.  (The 
downward Q deflection occurs only if the activity 
crosses the ventricular septum from left to right and 
is often missing.)  The upward deflection to R 
occurs as the negative depolarization wave moves 
down the septum toward the positive electrode.  As 
the depolarization wave reaches the apex and 
reverses direction, the wave also reverses,  moving 
down toward S as the depolarization wave moves 
up toward the negative electrode through the outer 
walls of the ventricle.  The T wave corresponds to 
ventricular repolarization.  Atrial repolarization is  
iso-electric, meaning that it produces no waveform. 
 The ECG corresponds only to the electrical 
events within the heart, the depolarizations and 
repolarizations.  The patterns do not correspond to 
mechanical activity- contractions and relaxations.  
The electrical events occur before the mechanical 
events.  A time interval is associated with the waves 
and between the waves in the normal ECG.  The P 
wave normally is about 0.08 seconds; the QRS 
complex about 0.06 seconds, and the interval 
between P and R is about 0.08 seconds. 
 In a patient with suspect ed damage to the 
myocardium (ischemia, necrosis, infection) the flow 
of current in the area of injury is altered.  Using the 
combined changes that appear on the 12 different 
leads, each looking at the injury from a different 
axis, the actual location of th e injury can often be 
determined.   
 ECG time intervals can be predictive of 
conduction abnormalities.  For example, the 
interval between P and R produces a delay between 
contraction of the atria and contraction of the 
ventricles, giving the ventricles ade quate time to 
fill.  If the interval is too short, the ventricles 
contract prematurely.  If too long, a cardiac 
arrhythmia could occur as the AV node begins to 
pace the ventricles and the SA node paces the atria. 
 Recall that the two nodes pace at differen t rates, 
the AV being slower than the SA.  If each P wave is 
not associated with a QRS complex, this has 
occurred.  It's called a heart block. 
 Instantaneous heart rate can be determined 
from the ECG.  An abnormally high rate is called 
tachycardia. Causes include stress, anxiety, drugs 
and fever. An abnormally low rate is bradycardia. 
It can occur in hypothermia and diving under water, 
as examples. Flutter refers to a very rapid rate that 
still has a regular or nearly regular ECG pattern.  In 
ventricular fibrillation, pattern regularity is lost. 
Coordination between contracting muscle cells is 
lost and the contractions no longer generate enough 
pressure to pump blood. The regular ECG pattern is 
replaced with electrical noise. Ventricular 
fibrillation is life  threatening and must be quickly 
treated with cardiac massage and converted with 
electrical defibrillation. Here, 440 volts AC or 
about 2000 volts DC are briefly passed through the 
heart to stop all electrical activity.  The hope is that 
when spontaneous electrical activity resumes, the 
SA node will again establish the rhythm.

===== PAGE 24 =====
20 
LESSON 7:  HEMODYNAMICS  
 
 The cardiac cycle refers to cardiac activity 
for one complete heart beat.  There are two periods 
in each cycle for both the atria and ventricles.  
Systole is the period of contraction of cardiac 
muscle and diastole is the period of relaxation.  
Other events of the cycle include changes in atrial, 
ventricular and arterial pressures and volumes; 
opening and closing of heart valves; electrical 
events (ECG); and the heart sounds.  The timing of 
these events in one cardiac cycle is illustrated 
below. The pressures shown in the figure 
correspond to those of the left heart. Pressure 
curves for the right heart are similar in form but 
lower in magnitude, the maximum pressure is about 
25 mmHg.  Lower pressure is required to pump 
blood to the lungs.   
THE CARDIAC CYCLE 
 Heart sounds are caused by closure of 
heart valves. There are two main heart sounds.  The 
first sound (lubb) is caused by closure of the 
atrioventricular valves. The second heart sound 
(dubb) is associated with closure of the aortic and 
pulmonary (semilunar) valves. The sounds are 
actually produced by blood turbulence that occurs 
near the closing valves.  Minor leaks in valves can 
cause additional soft sounds called heart murmurs. 
 Note on the figure that whenever the 
pressure relationship across a valve changes (that is, 
whenever two pressure curves cross), the valve 
changes position from open to closed or from 
closed to open. Pressure opens and closes the 
valves.  So when ventricular pressure suddenly 
exceeds atrial pressure at the beginning of 
ventricular systole, the AV valves are pushed 
closed and when ventricular pressure exceeds aortic 
pressure (also at the beginning of ventricular 
systole), the semilunar valve is pushed open. 
 There is one exception.  Because of the 
momentum of blood forcefully ejected from the 
ventricle, the semilunar valves doesn't close the 
instant arterial pressure exceeds ventricular 
pressure.  Note that when the aortic valve does 
close, there is a temporary drop in aortic pressure as 
the blood flows back against the valve and into the 
coronary arteries.   
 The force of blood pumped from the 
ventricles into the arteries distends the elastic tissue 
in their walls, storing potent ial energy.  Recoil of 
the walls when the flow from the ventricle stops is 
converted back into kinetic energy of flow.  
Therefore, while flow in the ventricles is 
periodically interrupted by closing of valves, flow 
through the blood vessels is continuous.  
 Note that 75% of ventricular filling occurs 
even before the atria contract.  Atrial fibrillation is 
not a life-threatening event. 
 CARDIAC WORK 
 By plotting the cardiac cycle as a pressure 
volume relationship, the work of the heart can be 
determined. Du ring diastolic filling, pressure 
increases only slightly (Phase I). When the ventricle 
contracts, pressure increases significantly, but 
during the time when both sets of valves are still

===== PAGE 25 =====
21 
closed, volume cannot change (Phase II).  When the 
semilunar valves d o open, volume decreases as 
blood is ejected under pressure.  Pressure continues 
to increase until sufficient volume is lost, at which 
time the pressure declines (Phase III).  Then, as the 
ventricle relaxes, pressure drops suddenly.  Again 
volume cannot ch ange during the time when both 
sets of valves are closed (Phase IV).  The area 
within the curve is the work required to raise the 
blood pressure to the required level.   It represents 
about 99% of the total work of the heart.  An 
additional small amount of  work is required to 
create the kinetic energy for blood flow. This 
normally represents only about 1% of the total work 
of the heart, but can increase significantly under the 
right circumstances- valve failure, for example.  In 
the figure, note that stroke volume is about 70 ml at 
rest and that while aortic pressure cycles between 
80 and 120 mm Hg, ventricular pressure cycles 
between 0 and 120 mm Hg. Ventricular pressure 
has to drop below atrial pressure or the ventricles 
can’t fill with blood from the atria. 
HEMODYNAMICS OF BLOOD FLOW 
 When we consider control of circulation, it 
will become apparent that pressure, flow and 
resistance are all important.  These three variables 
are related by Ohm's law:  
where Q dot is flow, P is pressure and R is  
resistance. 
 Given an average adult blood flow of about 
5 L/min or 85 ml/sec, and a pressure drop from 
aorta to vena cavae of about 100 mmHg, total 
peripheral resistance (TPR) is about 1.2 
mmHg/ml/sec.  Given an average pressure drop in 
the pulmonary circulation of about 14 mmHg, the 
TPR of the lungs is only about 0.16 mmHg/ml/sec. 
 Assuming laminar flow, we can use 
Poiseuille's law to identify factors that contribute to 
resistance.  Poiseuille's law states that flow (Q dot) 
through cylindrical tubes is related to the difference 
in pressure  (P), the length of the tube (l), the 
viscosity of the fluid flowing in the tube ( ), and 
the radius of the tube (r).  The relationship is 
summarized as follows:  
Note that increases in  or l cause decreases in Q 
dot. You can jus t as easily remember these 
relationships if you think about how each of these 
factors would be expected to affect flow.  You 
expect flow to be increased if pressure increases or 
if the tube expands. But if the fluid becomes thicker 
(more viscous) it won't flow as well.  As the fluid 
drags against the walls of the tube (frictional drag), 
flow also decreases; so increasing the length of the 
tube also decreases flow. 
 Note that radius has more impact on flow 
than any of the other variables.  It is raised to th e 
fourth power.  Doubling radius would increase flow 
sixteen-fold.  While length of vessels can change 
and viscosity of blood can change, minute -to-
minute regulation of blood flow is achieved most 
efficiently by changing vessel radius using 
vasoconstriction and vasodilation.   
 Another hemodynamic relationship relates 
blood flow (Q dot) and vessel cross -sectional area 
(A) to velocity (V) of the flowing blood.  Note that 
flow is in units of volume per unit time (ml/min, for 
example) while velocity is in uni ts of distance per 
unit time (cm/sec).  The relationship is summarized:  
As blood flow increases, velocity increases.  
However, blood flow from one vessel bed to the 
next is fairly constant, about 85 ml/sec at rest.   But 
as total cross -sectional area incr eases, velocity 
decreases.  Arteries and veins, with a relatively 
low cross -sectional area, have a high blood 
velocity.  This is appropriate for distribution and 
collection of blood.  Taken together, the total cross-
sectional area of capillaries is very la rge, giving 
them a low blood velocity.  This allows adequate 
time for exchange between capillaries and the 
adjacent tissue cells.  Even so, because capillaries 
are so short, blood only spends a few seconds in 
them. 
Vessel  
 
Aorta 
Arteries 
Capillaries 
Veins 
Vena cavae 
Flow 
ml/sec 
 85 
 85 
 85 
 85 
 85 
Area 
cm2 
2.5 
20-40 
2500 
250-80 
8 
Velocity 
cm/sec 
  35 
  2-4 
  0.03 
  0.3-1 
  11

===== PAGE 26 =====
22 
LESSON 8:  ARTERIES, CAPILLARIES AND VEINS 
 
Blood vessels are designed to deliver blood 
to the tissues and exchange materials as required by 
the cells. No living cell is more than 20 or 30 
microns from a blood source.  All vessels are lined 
with a smooth single layer of endothelial cells.  The 
smooth surface is necessary to prevent clotting.  For 
capillaries, this is the only layer.  Arteries and veins 
have muscle and connective tissue layers beneath 
the endothelium.  Visceral muscle in vessel walls 
controls the pressure and distribution of blo od.  
Connective tissue is elastic enough to allow vessels 
to distend, yet strong enough to contain the blood 
beyond the elastic limit. 
ARTERIES 
 Arteries are the distribution vessels of the 
circulatory system, carrying blood from the heart to 
the capillaries.  While all arteries are muscular, it is 
in the small arteries, called arterioles, where 
discontinuous rings of muscle produce most of the 
resistance in the circulatory system.  As much as 
two thirds the total peripheral resistance is found in 
arterioles. In addition, small precapillary 
sphincter muscles at the ends of the arterioles 
control blood flow into individual capillary beds, 
allowing blood to enter tissues with high need and 
diverting it away from tissues with low need.  
Elastic tissue allows ar teries to distend under the 
pressure of systole and then to recoil during 
diastole, providing a continuous blood flow even 
when there is no ventricular flow.   
 Blood in arteries is under high pressure.  
The contractions of the ventricles produce pressure 
pulsations in arteries ranging, on average, from 120 
mm Hg during left ventricular systole to 80 mmHg 
during diastole.  The pulsations are damped out 
when the blood passes through the high resistance 
of the arterioles.  The difference between systolic 
and diastolic pressure is pulse pressure, and is a 
measure of arterial compliance. Abnormally high 
pulse pressure is a sign of stiffening arteries, as 
occurs in older adults.   
The pressure can be measured by providing 
sufficient pressure to occlude flow throu gh an 
artery (usually the brachial artery in the arm) and 
measuring the pressures at which flow returns.  
When cuff pressure is above systolic pressure, there 
is no flow and no sounds are heard in the artery.  
When cuff pressure is below systolic pressure but 
above diastolic pressure, blood flows only when 
the ventricle contracts, producing thumping 
sounds in the artery (Korotkoff sounds). The 
pressure at which the sounds first begin is systolic 
pressure.  When cuff pressure is below diastolic 
pressure, the sounds disappear as the blood flows 
continuously again. The pressure at which the 
sounds first disappear is diastolic pressure. 
CAPILLARIES 
 Capillaries are the exchange vessels.  The 
endothelial lining is the only cell layer of the 
capillary. As exchange vessels, they need to be thin. 
 Not all capillaries are equally permeable, however. 
 Capillaries of the liver and spleen are highly 
permeable; while capillaries are the brain have low 
permeability, forming what is called the blood-brain 
barrier. There are  about 10 billion capillaries 
providing an exchange area about 500 to 700 square 
meters.  Capillaries are very narrow; red blood cells 
must pass through single file.  Most exchange 
occurs by diffusion and most diffusion occurs 
through clefts between endothelial cells.  On transit 
through an average capillary bed, the water of 
plasma exchanges with that of interstitial fluid 
about 80 times, mostly across intercellular clefts.  
All of the principles of diffusion discussed earlier 
apply to exchange of nutrient s and wastes across 
the capillaries.   
 In addition to diffusion, hydrostatic 
pressure (the pressure of filtration) and osmotic 
pressure gradients create additional fluid exchange. 
Plasma is hyperosmotic to interstitial fluid.  The 
osmotic gradient reflect s the fact that the plasma 
contains 7 to 8% protein but interstitial fluid 
contains only 2 to 3% protein.  The net effect of 
osmosis is to pull fluid into the capillaries.   On the 
other hand, capillary blood is under pressure.  At 
the inflow to the capill aries, pressure is about 30 
mmHg and drops to about 10 mmHg at the outflow. 
 As blood enters capillaries, hydrostatic pressure is 
greater than osmotic pressure and fluid filters into 
the interstitial fluid.  By the time blood reaches the 
end of the capilla ries, the hydrostatic pressure has 
fallen enough so that the osmotic pressure gradient 
is greater and water pulled back into the capillaries.

===== PAGE 27 =====
23 
  The volume exchanged by filtration and 
osmosis (20 ml/min for the whole body) is small 
compared to that exchan ged by diffusion (4000 
ml/min). While it isn't large by comparison, 
diffusion occurs equally in both directions while the 
fluid lost from the capillaries by filtration is greater 
than the fluid gained by osmosis.   Of the 20 ml/min 
that passes out of the c apillaries by filtration and 
osmosis, all but 2 ml is returned.  That’s about 3 
liters/day.  Also, there is a slight net loss of protein 
from the blood as well.  It is vital that this excess 
fluid and protein be returned to the circulatory 
system.  This is accomplished by a parallel venous 
system, the lymphatic system, discussed below. 
 Capillaries are composed of a single layer 
of squamous (flat) endothelial cells and yet are able 
to withstand pressures of 30 mmHg or more.  This 
is explained by their very small radius .  Wall 
tension (T), pressure (P) and radius (r) are related 
according to the law of Laplace: 
T = P × r 
Wall tension in capillaries is extremely small 
because the very small radius of capillaries more 
than compensates for the relatively high pressure. 
THE LYMPHATIC SYSTEM 
 The excess 
protein and fluid 
enters the lymphatic 
capillaries that are 
located in close 
proximity to the 
blood capillaries. 
Lymphatic capillaries 
are much more 
permeable than blood 
capillaries. This 
enables them to also 
remove proteins and 
foreign material 
including bacteria and viruses from interstitial fluid 
as well as excess fluid.   The fluid collected, called 
lymph, passes into lymphatic veins.  Lymph is 
clear and colorless; very similar to interstitial fluid. 
 Lymph vessels ultimately empty into two major 
branches; the right lymphatic duct  and thoracic 
duct.  The right lymphatic duct receives lymph 
collected from the upper right quadrant of the body. 
The thoracic duct receives the rest.  The ducts 
return lymph to the bloo d through the respective 
subclavian vein ("below the clavicle").  The excess 
fluid lost in the blood capillaries is thus returned to 
the blood.  Lymphatic veins, like those carrying 
blood described below, have smooth muscle in their 
walls and valves to ins ure the uni -directional flow 
of lymph.   
 As lymph moves toward its entry points 
into the general circulation, it passes through 
clusters of small kidney bean sized filters called 
lymph nodes.  As shown by the dots in the figure 
above, nodes are particularly numerous in cervical 
(neck), axillary (armpit), antecubital (elbow) and 
inguinal (groin) areas.  Numerous nodes are also 
found in the abdominal cavity and mediastinum 
(area around the heart).  Afferent lymphatic veins 
carry lymph into the nodes.  There the lymph is 
cleaned and filtered. The nodes contain an 
abundance of phagocytic cells in sinus channels 
that destroy much of the cellular debris picked up 
by lymphatic capillaries.  Efferent lymphatic veins 
carry the filtered lymph back toward the circulatory 
system.  Unfortunately, the permeable lymphatic 
capillaries als o serve as an entry point in the 
circulatory system for stray cancer cells , allowing 
them to spread throughout the body. 
 The lymph nodes are also a site of 
lymphocyte production. Lymphocyt es are 
associated with our immune system that participates 
in the defense of the body.  Unlike phagocytes that 
scavenge many types of invading cells, 
lymphocytes can only attack the specific cell type 
they are programmed to recognize.   
 Since lymphatic ca pillaries are more 
permeable than systemic capillaries, the lymphatic 
system accomplishes another task.   While the 
digested products of carbohydrates and proteins are 
easily absorbed from the gut into systemic 
capillaries, digested fat molecules are too l arge.   
The more permeable lymphatic capillaries absorb 
digested fats from the intestines and transport them 
into the blood through the lymphatic veins. 
 The spleen is an organ associated with the 
lymphatic system.  It serves as a blood filter.  As 
blood passes through the "pulp" of the spleen, old 
and damaged red blood cells are removed and 
excess circulating red cells are stored.  If oxygen 
demand increases, these stored red cells can be

===== PAGE 28 =====
24 
released, increasing the concentration of circulating 
blood cells.   
VEINS 
 Veins and the smaller venules leading out 
of the capillaries, provide the collection function for 
the circulatory system. Returning blood to the heart 
is not always an easy task.  For example, in an erect 
person, standing perfectly still, venous pr essure at 
the level of the heart is near zero, but venous 
pressure in the feet is about 90 mm Hg. This is due 
to the gravitational effect on hydrostatic pressure. 
The pressure of blood in the feet is increased by the 
weight of the blood above the feet.  
 To reduce the effect of gravity, veins have 
a series of one-way valves (similar to the semilunar 
valves of the heart) along their entire length.  Blood 
can only move toward the heart.  Contraction of 
smooth muscle in the veins displaces blood and, 
because o f the one -way valves, the blood is 
displaced only toward the heart.  Contraction of 
skeletal muscles squeezes veins running through 
them, also displacing blood toward the heart.  This 
is called "milking" the veins.  During inspiration, 
the same process that sucks air into the lungs, sucks 
blood into the thorax, also increasing venous return. 
Expiration compresses the thoracic veins but, as 
with venous blood flow caused by contraction of 
skeletal muscle, blood can still only move toward 
the heart due to the one-way valves. 
 As a result of the action of the skeletal 
muscle “pumps”, venous pressure in the feet of a 
walking person is only about 20 mm Hg. If one then 
stands perfectly still, venous pressure in the feet 
will increase to 90 mm Hg within 30 seconds or so. 
The high venous pressure is transmitted back into 
the capillaries, causing increased fluid filtration into 
interstitial spaces (edema). Within 15 to 30 minutes 
of standing still, up to 20 % of the blood volume 
can be lost, with an accompanying drop i n blood 
pressure. This contributes to the tendency to lose 
consciousness, as sometimes occurs in soldiers 
standing in ranks for long periods of time.  
 If arteries are resistance vessels, veins are 
volume vessels.  They are about 24 times as 
compliant as arteries.  About 64% or 3 to 3.5 liters 
of circulating blood is found in the venous system 
at rest.  Contraction of vascular smooth muscle, 
especially in the veins, can reduce the overall size 
of the vascular system to maintain adequate blood 
pressure in the face of a loss of as much as 20% of 
the blood volume. 
 [Note: Arterial blood pressure is also 
affected by gravity. Blood pressure measured in 
the arm is at the level of the heart and mean blood 
pressure is about 100 mm Hg. If measured in the 
ankle of a standing person, normal mean arterial 
blood pressure would be about 190 mm Hg.] 
 Varicose veins  is a problem that often 
occurs in persons engaged in activities that require 
standing motionless for prolonged periods or in 
pregnant women with increased venous pressure in 
the lower extremities due to the increased pelvic 
pressure reducing venous return. Here, the veins 
become so distended that the valves are unable to 
plug the lumen even in the closed position. As a 
result, the distended peripheral veins protr ude and 
fluid begins to leak into the tissue from the veins 
(edema). Untreated, the increase in tissue fluid can 
compromise nutrient diffusion to tissue cells, 
causing muscle weakness and skin deterioration.  
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE 
 In coronary artery disease, the large arteries 
that provide nutrients to the heart muscle itself 
begin to narrow as fatty materials accumulate 
within the vessel walls.  The lipid deposits of 
neutral fat and cholesterol produce an irregular 
mass of yellow, mushy (athero) debris that plugs 
the vessel lumen and forms a rough surface ideal 
for thrombus (blood clot) formation.  Myocardial 
cells are ravenous for nutrients, especially oxygen.  
As blood flow decreases, ischemia (oxygen 
starvation) rapidly develops.  Ischemia predisposes 
the heart cells to death (necrosis) and leaves a scar 
of dead tissue ( myocardial infarction ). It also 
predisposes the heart to fibrillation and failure to 
pump blood ( cardiac arrest ). Risk factors for 
coronary artery disease include high blood pressure, 
high cholesterol and triglycerides, smoking, obesity 
and stress.

===== PAGE 29 =====
25 
LESSON 9:  CONTROL OF CIRCULATION  
 
Blood pressure  (BP) is the product of 
cardiac output  (CO) and total peripheral 
resistance (TPR). 
BP = CO × TPR 
To understand how blood pressure is controlled we 
need to see how cardiac output and total peripheral 
resistance are controlled. 
 Cardiac output is the quantity of blood 
that is ejected by one ventricle per minute.  It is 
calculated as the product of stroke volume (SV), 
the volume of blood ejected  from a ventricle per 
beat, and heart rate (HR), the number of beats per 
minute. 
SV × HR = CO 
Inserting normal adult resting values: 
70 ml/beat × 70 beats/min = 4900 ml/min 
 One of the benefits of regular endurance exercise is 
to increase the size of the c ardiac muscle cells 
(hypertrophy).  The added strength allows stroke 
volume to increase so that cardiac output can be 
maintained with a lower heart rate. In a marathon 
runner, resting cardiac output might be 
100 ml/beat × 50 beats/min = 5000 ml/min 
At maximum rate of exercise, the runner’s cardiac 
output can be 50% higher than a non -athlete but 
with a lower heart rate.  
CARDIAC OUTPUT CONTROL 
 Extrinsic control relies on the nervous and 
endocrine systems.  Neural control is exerted by 
the sympathetic and pa rasympathetic branches of 
the autonomic (involuntary) nervous system.  
Sympathetic efferent fibers to the heart increase 
myocardial contractility and thus increase stroke 
volume.  Sympathetic nerves also increase heart 
rate.  Therefore, the sympathetic bra nch increases 
cardiac output.  The receptors on the heart that 
respond to sympathetic stimulation are called beta 
receptors.  Beta blockers are often used to treat 
people suffering from high blood pressure. 
Parasympathetic innervation has the opposite 
effects.   
  The center of the reflex control mechanism 
for cardiac output is in the medulla oblongata, the 
lowest portion of the brain s tem just above the 
spinal cord.   Within the medulla oblongata is a 
cardiac accelerator center  (CAC) that acts 
through sympathetic motor nerves and a separate 
cardiac inhibitory center  (CIC) acting through 
parasympathetic motor nerves.   
  Endocrine control is exerted by several 
hormones. The most important are norepinephrine 
and epinephrine, two hormones of the adrenal 
glands.  Both have the effect of increasing heart rate 
and myocardial contractility, thereby serving as a 
backup system for the sympathetic nerves. Of the 
two, epinephrine is the most potent. 
   Intrinsic control mechanisms require no 
participation by either the endocrine or nervous 
systems.  It is the organ, in a sense, controlling 
itself. Stroke volume has an intrinsic control 
mechanism referred to as Starling's Law of the 
Heart.  The law states that as the ventricular fibers 
are stretched or elongated by increa sed ventricular 
filling, the fibers contract with greater force and 
more blood is delivered into the arteries with each 
beat.  The more the fibers are stretched (without 
damaging them), the greater the stroke volume.  
During exercise, for example, blood flow increases. 
As a result, more blood is returned to the heart.  As 
the increased venous return is forced into the 
ventricles, the stretched fibers contract with more 
force, increasing stroke volume. 
VASCULAR RESISTANCE CONTROL 
 Total peripheral resistance  (TPR) is 
normally regulated by changing the radius of blood 
vessels.  Vasoconstriction decreases vessel radius, 
increasing TPR and (if flow remains constant) 
increasing blood pressure. (Refer to the 
hemodynamics equations presented earlier.) 
Vasodilation would have the opposite effect. 
  Extrinsic control is by means of the 
nervous and endocrine systems. Neural control of 
TPR is also centered in the medulla oblongata.  
Besides the cardiac centers, there is also a 
vasoconstrictor center (VCC) that sends eff erent 
impulses to certain vasoconstrictor fibers 
innervating the smooth muscle in the walls of the 
blood vessels.  Receptors in vascular smooth 
muscle that initiate constriction are called alpha

===== PAGE 30 =====
26 
receptors.  Alpha receptor blockers are also used to 
treat hi gh blood pressure.  As vessels narrow, 
vascular resistance and blood pressure increase. A 
vasodilator center has not been identified in the 
brain. Vasodilation is achieved by inhibition of the 
VCC. The centers within the medulla oblongata 
that control card iovascular reflexes are called the 
vital centers for obvious reasons.  Centers 
controlling reflexes essential for survival are 
generally located in the brain stem; the first part of 
the brain to have evolved. 
 Endocrine control of TPR is exerted by 
several hormones, but again, the best examples are 
two hormones of the adrenal glands.  
Norepinephrine is a potent 
vasoconstrictor of blood vessels.  Its 
effect is to increase resistance and blood 
pressure.  Epinephrine, on the other 
hand, constricts vessels in some beds 
and dilates vessels in other beds.  For 
example, during exercise, epinephrine 
vasodilates vessels to skeletal muscle, a 
tissue that requires more blood.  But 
epinephrine acts to vasoconstrict vessels 
in the digestive and urinary systems.  It 
functions to redistribute blood more 
than to increase total peripheral resistance during 
exercise. 
REFLEX PATHWAYS  
 We have until now been considering the 
efferent nerves controlling blood pressure.  Let's 
now consider the entire reflex arc, using as an 
example one of the many types of sensory receptors 
involved in control of circulation. The 
baroreceptors, are located in the arch of the aorta 
and in the carotid arteries of the neck.  They 
respond to changes in blood pressure.  The rate of 
baroreceptor firing (depolarization) is sent to the 
vital centers through sensory nerves.  An increase 
in blood pressure causes an increase in receptor 
firing rate.  The CIC responds and decreases heart 
rate and stroke volume.  The VCC is inhibited and 
the vessels vasodilate, decreasing resistance.  Blood 
pressure falls back to normal.  A drop in pressure 
below normal decreases firing rate of the receptors. 
The afferent fibers stimulate the CAC increasing 
cardiac output.  They also stimulate the VCC 
causing vasoconstriction th at increases resistance.  
This causes blood pressure to increase back to 
normal.   
 A common example illustrating the 
efficiency of these reflexes is the normal response 
to standing from a lying position.  Initially, blood 
pools toward the lower extremitie s decreasing 
venous return to the heart.  By Starling’s Law, 
decreased filling reduces tension in the ventricular 
wall and contractions are weaker causing cardiac 
output to fall.  Decreasing cardiac output decreases 
blood pressure.  The baroreceptor firing  rate is 
decreased and sensory input to the brain triggers a 
reflex increase in heart rate and arteriolar 
constriction bringing blood pressure back to 
normal.   
 
AUTOREGULATION (OF BLOOD FLOW) 
 It is important to keep in mind that what is 
controlled in the  larger arteries is blood pressure 
but what the body tissues need is blood flow.  
According to Poiseuille's Law, given in the figure, 
if pressure falls, all other variables remaining 
unchanged, flow will fall.  This is shown by the 
dashed line in the figure.   
 
 Some organs require a very constant and 
adequate blood flow.  The heart and brain are 
examples.  Organs like the skin are more tolerant of 
variations in flow.  Organs that do require a steady 
flow have developed a mechanism to maintain flow

===== PAGE 31 =====
27 
constant even when blood pressure changes.  This 
ability is called autoregulation.  Again referring to 
the equation in the figure, if pressure decreased, 
then flow would decrease. Knowing that the most 
effective way to change flow is to change radius 
(r4), what c ould one do to radius, to cancel the 
effect of a drop in pressure? According to the 
equation, an increase in radius would compensate 
for a decrease in pressure. The changes would be in 
the direction of canceling each other and flow could 
remain constant.  That possibility is shown by the 
solid line in the figure and is, in fact, what happens 
in autoregulation. 
 One explanation is as follows:  Suppose 
blood pressure falls.  Initially, flow would also 
decrease. Certain metabolites normally carried 
away in the  flowing blood begin to accumulate. 
Some of the metabolites are vasodilators and vessel 
radius increases returning flow to normal. As the 
blood pressure mechanisms discussed earlier bring 
blood pressure back to normal, flow will increase 
above normal.  Exc essive amounts of vasodilator 
substance are cleared from the tissue and the vessel 
would constrict to its normal diameter, bringing 
blood flow back to normal.  This is an intrinsic 
control mechanism that does not involve the 
nervous or endocrine systems. 
 Other mechanisms used to explain 
autoregulation include tissue oxygen tension and a 
myogenic response.  Hypoxia that might occur if 
flow falls, acts as a potent vasodilator in many 
systemic blood vessels.  The drop in pressure that 
reduces flow is countered by an increase in radius, 
bringing flow back to normal even though blood 
pressure is low.  In the myogenic theory, visceral 
muscle in blood vessel walls can reflex ively 
contract when wall tension is increased, causing 
vasoconstriction.  Recall in the dis cussion of 
smooth muscle that contractions often occur with 
no neural stimulation and that one stimulus is 
increased tension. Tissues experiencing reduced 
flow for extended periods (weeks, months) begin to 
develop new vessels to provide a permanent 
increase in flow. This is called angiogenesis.  It is 
hypothesized that nutrient deficiencies in the tissues 
may release angiogenic factors that promote 
development of new vessels.  Angiogenesis occurs 
rapidly in new tissues including tissues of newborns 
or canc er tissue, but occurs very slowly in 
established tissues.  New vessels can also develop 
around blocked arteries or veins, providing 
collateral circulation. 
LONG-TERM BLOOD PRESSURE CONTROL 
 Pressure control mechanisms discussed so 
far gradually lose their ability to regulate over a 
period of hours or days.  Long -term week-to-week 
or month-to-month control requires the renal-body 
fluid control mechanism of the kidneys.  As blood 
pressure rises, more sodium ion and water are 
passed from the blood into the urine to be excreted. 
Reducing the fluid volume in the blood reduces 
blood pressure.  The loss of additional fluid in the 
urine as a result of increased blood pressure is 
called pressure diuresis.  Increased blood pressure 
also causes increased excretion of s odium ions. 
This is called pressure natruresis (from the Latin 
for sodium). It promotes water loss because sodium 
ion increases the osmotic pressure of the urine, 
pulling water along with it.  When pressure falls 
too low, salt and water are retained by the  kidney, 
bringing volume and pressure back to normal.   
 The renal-body fluid mechanism is able to 
exactly correct any imbalance completely.  
Therefore, it is a system with infinite gain.   The 
baroreceptors, for example, can only partially 
correct an imba lance.  For every increase of 8 
mmHg in pressure, the baroreceptors can only 
bring pressure back down by about 7 mmHg.  The 
gain is therefore about -7 ( correction divided by 
the error).

===== PAGE 32 =====
28 
LESSON 10: URINE FORMATION   
BODY FLUID COMPARTMENTS   
About 55 to 60% of the weight of an 
average individual is water.  A person weighing 150 
pounds, for example, has about 85 pounds (or 40 
liters) of water in his/her system.  Therefore, it is 
important to understand how water is distributed in 
the body, how distribution is controlled, and how 
water intake is balanced by water output.  The 
urinary system plays a dominant role in fluid 
balance. 
INTAKE VS OUTPUT 
 On an average day in an average adult, 90-
95% of the fluid added to the system is ingested, 
two-thirds as liquid and one -third as the liquid 
component of solid food.  About 5-10% is obtained 
through metabolism.  For example, the 
mitochondria produce water (and CO 2) from the 
oxidation of glucose to produce ATP.  The total 
amount of intake per day averages about 2500 ml. 
 
Source Input (ml) Output (ml) 
Metabolism        250  
Moist food        750  
Beverages      1500  
Kidneys    1500 
Lungs      350 
Skin      350 
Feces      150 
Sweat      150 
Total      2500   2500 
  
Normally, intake is balanced by output.  
Most water lost per day is excreted in the urine.  
The rest is lost from sweat, expired water vapor, the 
feces, and water evaporation through the skin.  (See 
table.)  
During exercise, fluid loss increases 
significantly due ma inly to increased water loss 
from breathing and sweating.  The kidneys are the 
organs of water balance.  That is, if you become 
dehydrated, you can’t exhale dry gas to conserve 
water or secrete a concentrated sweat low in 
water.  But if you become dehydrat ed, you can 
conserve water by excreting a concentrated urine. 
If you become over -hydrated, you excrete a dilute 
urine. 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF BODY FLUIDS 
 More than two -thirds of body fluid (about 
28 liters) is found inside cells as cytoplasm.  This 
fluid is the intracellular fluid.       
 The volume of all fluids outside cells, 
extracellular fluid, is about 14 liters, or about one-
third of total body water.  About 3 liters of this is 
intravascular; the fluid component of blood called 
plasma.  Small amounts are f ound in endolymph, 
perilymph, aqueous humor, cerebral spinal fluid 
and a few others. The rest is interstitial fluid.  
 Body fluid volumes can be measured using 
an indicator dilution principle. For example, to 
measure blood plasma volume, 10 milligrams of 
Evan's blue dye is injected into the bloodstream.  
Evan's blue is impermeable to blood cells and is 
unable to leave the bloodstream.  Therefore, in 
time, it distributes itself uniformly throughout the 
plasma. After allowing sufficient time, a blood 
sample is drawn and the plasma concentration of 
dye is determined.  If it were found to be 0.0033 mg 
per ml of plasma, then the plasma volume is 10 mg 
divided by 0.0033 mg/ml or about 3030 ml.  There 
are appropriate markers for measuring various body 
fluid compart ment volumes. Those that can’t be 
measured can be calculated from known volumes. 
 Extracellular fluids contain high 
concentrations of sodium, chloride and bicarbonate 
ion.  Plasma contains about 7% protein and 
interstitial fluid about 2% protein.  Intracel lular 
fluid (cytoplasm) contains large amounts of 
potassium and phosph ate ions and about 25% 
protein. 
THE URINARY SYSTEM  
 The urinary system functions to regulate 
body water and control plasma electrolyte levels. In 
doing so, it regulates blood volume and  therefore 
helps maintain blood pressure. It also helps to keep 
blood pH within normal limits. The kidney is 
responsible for excreting many metabolic wastes 
including urea, uric acid and creatinine. 
THE KIDNEY 
 The two bean shaped kidneys are located in 
the back of the abdominal cavity at the level of the 
waist.  Blood entering each kidney from a renal 
artery is separated into waste products that leave

===== PAGE 33 =====
29 
through a tube 
called the ureter, 
and the purified 
blood returned to 
the body through 
the renal vein. A 
tough fibrous 
capsule forms the 
outer layer of each 
kidney.  Each 
kidney is 
composed of inner 
and outer regions 
with a central cavity.  The outer region is called the 
cortex.  Below the cortex is a region called the 
medulla, formed by microscopic tubules, including 
those that carry the newly formed urine to the 
central cavity.  The tubules extend from a broad 
base at the cortex to a narrow tip.  For this reason 
the clusters of medullary tubules are called the 
renal pyramids.  The tip of the pyramid is a thi n 
membrane called the renal papilla.  A large tube 
called the renal calyx collects urine as it crosses 
the papilla and carries it to the central cavity called 
the renal pelvis. 
 The urine is transported from the pelvis of 
each kidney to the urinary bladder through a tube 
called the ureter (one extends from each kidney).  
Visceral muscle in the walls of the ureters moves 
the urine to the bladder where it is stored.  Urine 
passes from the bladder to be voided through a 
single tube called the urethra.  In male s, the 
urethra also transports semen from the reproductive 
organs. In females, the urinary tract and 
reproductive tract are completely separate.  
 The functional units of the kidney are the 
one or two million nephrons. Each nephron 
consists of five parts: Bowman's capsule, the 
proximal convoluted tubule, the loop of Henle, the 
distal convoluted tubule, and the collecting duct.  
Most of the parts of the nephron are found in the 
cortex.  The collecting ducts and some of the loops 
of Henle extend down into the renal pyramids form 
the medulla of the kidney.   
 Each nephron has a network of blood 
vessels associated with it.  An afferent arteriole 
carries blood to a tuft of capillaries called the 
glomerulus located within Bowman's capsule.  An 
efferent arteriole  then carries blood from the 
glomerulus to peritubular capillaries  that 
surround the rest of the nephron tubules.  Exchange 
of materials between blood and urine occurs across 
both the glomerulus and the peritubular capillaries. 
The relationship between these structures can best 
be described by considering the four basic 
processes in urine formation: filtration, 
reabsorption, secretion and concentration. 
FILTRATION 
 About 20% of the total systemic blood flow 
passes through the kidneys (~1200 ml/min).  About 
20% of the blood plasma flowing into the 
glomerulus through the afferent arteriole  is 
filtered into Bowman's capsule.  That amounts to a 
combined glomerular filtration rate (GFR) that 
averages 125 ml/min.  That's approximately 50 
gallons/day.  About 99% of t he filtered water 
volume will be reabsorbed (most by osmosis) back 
into the plasma downstream from Bowman's 
capsule.  Only about 1500 ml/day will be excreted.  
The pressure in the glomerulus is 10 to 20 mmHg 
higher than that in Bowman's capsule, providing the 
hydrostatic pressure gradient for filtration. 
 The glomerulus is essentially a tuft of very 
permeable capillaries.  Any molecules with a 
molecular weight of less than 5000 are freely 
permeable to the capillary membranes.  Above that 
size, molecules bec ome less and less permeable.  
Molecules above 65,000 to 70,000 molecular 
weight are virtually impermeable.  That means that 
waste products like urea and creatinine as well as 
nutrients like amino acids, glucose and minerals 
like sodium ions and potassium i ons are all small 
enough to filter from the plasma into Bowman's 
capsule. Large molecules including plasma proteins

===== PAGE 34 =====
30 
are too large and remain in plasma, keeping the 
osmotic pressure of the plasma high (important later 
on for the reabsorption of water).  Lik ewise, blood 
cells are too large to filter and remain in the blood 
vessels.   
AUTOREGULATION OF FILTRATION 
 If blood pressure were to increase above 
normal, glomerular hydrostatic pressure would 
increase, GFR would increase and the volume of 
urine excreted would increase. This is referred to as 
pressure diuresis. The extra fluid lost as a result 
would reduce the blood volume and pressure would 
go back down.  
 But an autoregulatory (self -regulating) 
mechanism is necessary to control the amount of 
fluid loss. If blood pressure increased by 25%, and 
there was no autoregulation of filtration, urine 
output would increase by about thirty -fold.  This 
would cause a fatal drop in blood volume and blood 
pressure. A 50% drop in blood pressure would stop 
filtration comp letely and the nephrons would be 
damaged irreversibly.  
 GFR is controlled intrinsically by the 
kidney itself (autoregulation). Suppose blood 
pressure decreases below normal. GFR would 
initially decrease. Without control, the filtration 
rate might fall to dangerously low levels that could 
result in kidney failure. But the initial decrease in 
GFR and urine flow rate causes a decrease in the 
concentration of sodium and chloride ions in the 
urine of the distal convoluted tubules. This is 
because the reduced flow allows the urine to spend 
more time in the nephron and all during that time, 
sodium and chloride ions are being reabsorbed into 
the peritubular capillaries. Macula densa cells, in 
the walls of the distal convoluted tubules, sense the 
reduced ion levels and signal adjacent 
juxtaglomerular (juxta = next to)  cells located in 
the walls of the afferent arterioles.  The afferent 
arterioles respond to the direct stimulation by the 
juxtaglomerular cells and dilate. The efferent 
arterioles respond by constricting. The constriction 
of the efferent arterioles involves an  endocrine 
mechanism (the renin-angiotensin System) to be 
discussed later. Dilation of afferent vessels and 
constriction of efferent vessels increases the 
hydrostatic pressure in the glomerulus and t he rate 
of filtration increases.  Fluctuations of mean arterial 
blood pressure between 75 and 160 mmHg produce 
only slight changes in GFR. 
 The nervous system is able to exert limited 
control over filtration.  The sympathetic nervous 
system acts to decreas e filtration during times of 
stress by constricting the afferent arterioles.   
REABSORPTION AND SECRETION   
 After leaving the glomerulus, the efferent 
arterioles soon branch into a large capillary network 
that surrounds the tubules of the nephrons down 
stream from Bowman's capsule.  These capillaries 
are called the peritubular capillaries.  Here, further 
exchange between blood and urine can occur.  
Reabsorption refers to the movement of molecules 
from the urine back into the peritubular capillaries.  
This is important for nutrients that were small 
enough to be filtered into the urine.  Secretion 
refers to the movement of molecules from the 
peritubular capillaries into the nephron tubules.  
This is important for waste molecules that escaped 
filtration. 
 Sodium ions in the cells lining the renal 
tubules are rapidly reabsorbed into the interstitium 
by active transport. Recall that sodium ion 
concentration inside cells is kept low by the 
sodium-potassium exchange pump. This establishes 
a gradient for the facilit ated diffusion of sodium 
ions from the urine into the cells that line the 
nephron tubules. To facilitate this, the edge of the 
tubule cells adjacent to the lumen have multiple 
projections forming a brush border filled with 
carrier proteins. So sodium ions are transported 
from the urine into the cells by facilitated diffusion 
and out of the back of the cell into the interstitium 
by active transport. The carrier proteins for sodium 
ions also have binding sites for other molecules, 
including glucose and amino acids that  are then 
reabsorbed by co -transport with sodium ion. As 
these molecules accumulate within the tubule cells, 
a concentration gradient is established for them to 
leave the back of the cell by facilitated diffusion. 
Thus the only energy required is  the ATP needed 
for the sodium -potassium exchange pump that 
keeps sodium ion concentration low in the 
cytoplasm of the cells lining the tubules.  
 The concentration of sodium ion in the 
urine entering the collecting duct is nearly the same 
as that at the g lomerulus, meaning that if 99% of 
the water is reabsorbed, then 99% of the sodium ion 
must have been reabsorbed.  Most of the sodium

===== PAGE 35 =====
31 
ion is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules but there 
is also some reabsorption in the distal tubule.    
 As mentioned, glucose and amino acids are 
reabsorbed by co -transport with sodium ions.  
Normally all glucose and amino acids are 
reabsorbed by the time the urine leaves the 
proximal tubules.  However, the carrier molecules 
for glucose and the amino acids are saturable. As 
the filtered load of these substances approaches two 
or three times normal, they do begin to appear in 
the urine. In this case, it is said that the tubular 
maximum (Tmax) has been exceeded. 
 Small proteins that filter into the urine are 
reabsorbed by pinocyt osis. Proteins bind to 
receptors on the cell membrane and the membrane 
moves up and over, engulfing them. 
 Potassium and hydrogen ions are secreted- 
transported out of the blood and into the tubules.  
This occurs mainly in the distal tubule.  The energy 
is provided by the reabsorption of sodium ions, so 
this is an example of a counter -transport 
mechanism.  Hydrogen ions can also be secreted by 
active transport independent of sodium ions.  This 
allows the kidneys to play a vital role in the control 
of plasma  hydrogen ion concentration (acid -base 
balance). 
 Most chloride ions are reabsorbed by 
passive transport.  The negatively charged chloride 
ion is attracted to the positive charge of the sodium 
ion and moves with it back into the blood.  Some 
chloride is reabsorbed by active transport. 
 Urea (from breakdown of amino acids) and 
creatinine (from muscle creatine) are waste 
products excreted in high concentration in the urine. 
 About 90% of the creatinine found in the urine is 
filtered and about 10% secreted. Cr eatinine is not 
reabsorbed from the urine.  However, the urea 
molecule is small enough to diffuse back into the 
blood. But because water is reabsorbed more 
efficiently, urea concentration in the urine does still 
become quite high.  
CONCENTRATION 
 To conser ve water when the body is 
dehydrated, the kidney is able to draw water out of 
the urine by osmosis. The osmotic gradient is 
established by the loop of Henle. About 30% of the 
loops of Henle dip deep into the renal medulla. The 
osmotic concentration of urine entering the loop is 
about 300 mOsm. The osmotic concentration at the 
base of the loops can approach 1400 mOsm, while 
the urine leaving the loop and moving into the distal 
tubules can be as low as 50 mOsm. The reason the 
medulla becomes so hyperosmotic i s that the 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle is impermeable 
to water but is permeable to solutes like sodium ion 
and chloride ion.  The influx of these ions into the 
tissues raises the osmotic pressure of tissue fluid 
surrounding the loops of Henle to as  high as 1400 
mOsm at the bottom of the loops.   
 The loop structure of both the loop of 
Henle and the blood vessels (called the vasa recta) 
in the medulla, promote the osmotic gradient using 
the counter-current multiplier principle. The urine 
entering descending loop passes through the tissue 
made hyperosmotic by the ascending portion of the 
loop. Water is pulled out of the urine by osmosis as 
it descends down the loop, making the urine more 
concentrated with solutes that can then be deposited 
in the tissu e of the medulla on the way up the 
ascending loop. With the loss of solute, the urine 
leaving the loop of Henle is very hypoosmotic 
(dilute), creating the osmotic gradient.  
 The water permeability of the late distal 
tubule and collecting duct determine th e water 
concentration of the urine.  Recall, the collecting 
ducts also pass down through the very 
hyperosmotic medulla . This would favor the 
reabsorption of water out of the collecting duct and 
ultimately back into the blood. Normally, the 
collecting duct is not permeable to water.  If water 
is in excess in the body, the collecting duct remains 
impermeable and a dilute urine (as low as 50 
mOsm) is excreted.   
 However, if the body is dehydrated, a 
hormone called antidiuretic hormone  or ADH, 
produced by the hypothalamus and stored in the 
pituitary gland, is released into the blood stream.  
When ADH reaches receptors on the walls of the 
collecting duct, it opens water pores in the 
collecting duct allowing water to be pulled into the 
medulla by the high osmotic  pressure and leaving 
behind a very concentrated urine. In this way , the 
fluid balance function of the kidneys is separated 
from the waste excretion function.

===== PAGE 36 =====
32 
LESSON 11:  FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE BALANCE 
 
  There are two hormones that help regul ate 
fluid balance by targeting the kidney: aldosterone 
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). 
ALDOSTERONE 
  Aldosterone is a sodium ion retaining 
hormone produced by the adrenal cortex (the outer 
portion of the adrenal glands).  Its target is the distal 
convoluted tubule of the nephron.  There it acts to 
increase the reabsorption of sodium ions by active 
transport. (Recall that most sodium ion is 
reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.)  It 
also increases the secretion of potassium ions and 
hydrogen ions by counter-transport.  As sodium is 
reabsorbed, water follows by osmosis.  So the 
hormone becomes important when there is a loss of 
both fluid and electrolytes.  Control of aldosterone 
release is quite complex, involving a kidney 
enzyme, a lung enzyme and a plasma protein 
produced by the liver.  The table below shows the 
series of events that occur to correct a drop in blood 
pressure. Unlike control of blood pressure with 
baroreceptors, this mechanism takes many hours to 
produce its effect.  
ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE 
  Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is produced 
in the hypothalamus of the brain. It passes down the 
stalk of the pituitary gland through nerve fibers and 
is stored in the posterior part of the pituitary gland.  
The target of ADH is the nephron late distal 
convoluted tubule and collecting duct.  It acts to 
make these structures permeable to water.  Water is 
drawn out of the nephron and into the hyperosmotic 
tissues of the renal medulla. Diuresis (increase in 
urine output) is inhibited. ADH is a water retaining 
hormone. 
 ADH release is controlled by the nervous system 
as a reflex.  For reflex control, we need receptors.  
The receptors that stimulate ADH release are the 
osmoreceptors, located in the hypothalamus of the 
brain. These receptors  sense the osmotic 
concentration of body fluids. If fluids become too 
concentrated, ADH release is stimulated and 
enough water is retained to dilute the fluid to 
normal osmotic concentration.  If fluids become too 
dilute, osmoreceptors signal the brain to inhibit 
ADH release and a diuresis occurs until enough 
fluid is lost to return concentration to normal. 
ALDOSTERONE MECHANISM OF ACTION: 
When blood pressure falls or sodium ion levels fall, the cells near the glomerulus of the 
nephrons called juxtaglomerular cells release the enzyme renin into the blood stream. 
  
The blood contains an inactive liver protein called angiotensinogen. Renin causes it to be 
converted to angiotensin I, a partially active form, by cleaving off most of its amino acids. 
  
As angiotensin I is carried through the lungs by the blood, it is converted to angiotensin II by 
the lung enzyme angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) on cells lining the capillaries. 
  
Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor that raises the 
blood pressure by increasing vascular resistance. 
                   
Angiotensin II also stimulates the adrenal cortex to release the 
hormone aldosterone into the blood.   
   
Aldosterone stimulates sodium ion reabsorption in the distal 
convoluted tubules of the nephrons.   
    
As sodium ion is actively transported from the tubules into the 
blood, water follows by osmosis, expanding blood volume.
         
                        SYSTEMIC BLOOD PRESSURE INCREASES TOWARD NORMAL

===== PAGE 37 =====
33 
 Diabetes is a general term referring to 
conditions that cause excessive urine output.  
Diabetes mellitus is caused by lack of insulin, the 
hormone that is needed for glu cose uptake by 
certain cells.  With no insulin, glucose is retained in 
the blood. Excessive amounts then enter the 
nephron to be filtered into the urine. Excess glucose 
is retained in the urine because the glucose T max is 
exceeded. The glucose makes the ur ine 
hyperosmotic and water is retained in the urine by 
the high osmotic pressure.  Those with this type of 
diabetes excrete excess amounts of sweet (mellitus) 
urine containing excess amounts of glucose. 
 Diabetes insipidus  is characterized by 
chronic diure sis due to the failure of the 
hypothalamus and pituitary to produce and release 
ADH. With no water retaining hormone, fluids are 
rapidly lost through the kidney.  The watery urine 
in this situation is bitter (insipidus). The 
dehydration produces a tremendo us thirst and the 
victim is continuously going from toilet to drinking 
fountain.  ADH preparations are available to relieve 
this condition. 
FLUID AND ELECTROLYTE BALANCE 
 Aldosterone and ADH correct for two 
different conditions - dehydration and volume 
depletion.  
 Dehydration is characterized by a loss of 
water that is not matched with a loss of electrolytes. 
Either water is lost without electrolyte loss or is lost 
more rapidly than electrolytes. Examples include 
lack of drinking water, diabetes or severe sweating. 
Excessive water loss leaves an excess of 
electrolytes in the body fluids that remain. That is, 
they become hyperosmotic. This is sensed by 
osmoreceptors that trigger the release of ADH to 
increase water reabsorption from the collecting 
ducts. The  water corrects the dehydration and 
dilutes the electrolytes to normal concentration.  
 Infants are more susceptible to dehydration 
because they have a less well -developed ability to 
concentrate urine and have a greater ratio of body 
surface area to mass compared to adults.   
 Volume depletion  is characterized by 
simultaneous loss of both water and electrolytes. 
Examples are hemorrhage, excessive vomiting, 
diarrhea, or skin loss as a result of severe burns. 
The resulting drop is blood pressure triggers the 
release of aldosterone that directly increases 
reabsorptioin of electrolytes from the distal 
convoluted tubule. Water then follows by osmosis.  
FLUID LOADING DEMONSTRATION 
 In the diagrams below, the upper boxes 
represent the immediate effect of the experi mental 
procedure on extracellular fluids and the lower 
boxes show the results of the osmotic shift of water 
due to the extracellular changes.  White boxes 
represent normal conditions and gray boxes 
represent deviations from normal.  Compartment E 
is the extracellular (interstitial fluid) compartment 
and I is the intracellular (cytoplasm) compartment. 
The height of the box represents fluid 
concentration and the width corresponds to fluid 
volume.  Remember, water movement between 
boxes is caused by osmotic pressure gradients.  
 Hypertonic Loading.   Subjects in this 
group drink about 75 ml of 3% salt solution 
(remember 0.9% is isotonic).  The salt is absorbed 
from the digestive tract into the extracellular fluid 
making it more concentrated ( top figure).  The 
hyperosmotic interstitial fluid causes water to be 
drawn out of the cells by osmosis.  As a result of 
water loss, the volume of the cytoplasm is reduced 
and it becomes more concentrated bottom figure). 
 Osmoreceptors sense the increase in 
concentration of t he cytoplasm.  They signal the 
release of ADH, the water retaining hormone and 
enough water is reabsorbed from the urine to dilute 
the salt and return osmotic balance.  Over the next 
few hours these subjects will notice a decrease in 
urine output. The urin e produced, if any, will 
appear very concentrated with a high specific 
gravity compared to water.

===== PAGE 38 =====
34 
Hypotonic Loading.   Subjects in this 
group rapidly consume about a liter of water.  The 
water is absorbed into the extracellular fluid 
diluting its concentration and expanding its volume 
top figure).  The cytoplasm is now more 
concentrated (hyperosmotic) than the interstitial 
fluid so water is drawn in by osmosis.  The water 
expands the volume of the cell s and dilutes the 
concentration of the cytoplasm bottom figure). 
 Osmoreceptors sense the decreased 
concentration and volume receptors the increased 
volume of the cell s.  ADH is inhibited.  The 
collecting duct remains impermeable to water and 
the water is retained in the nephron and excreted in 
the urine.  Over  the next few hours these subjects 
will notice an increase in urine output and their 
urine will appear very dilute with a specific gravity 
very close to that of water. 
 Beer Loading . This group will consume 
two cans of beer.  Beer is hyperosmotic and that 
would tend to increase ADH release, but two cans 
represent significant volume loading which would 
tend to decrease ADH release. But beer contains 
alcohol and alcohol directly inhibits ADH, which 
in turn causes significant diuresis.  This group will 
produce the largest amounts of very dilute urine. 
ASSESSING KIDNEY FUNCTION 
 It is possible to measure blood and urine 
concentrations of many substances excreted by the 
kidney. Urea and creatinine are two nitrogenous 
molecules excreted in high concentration.  Hig h 
BUN (blood urea nitrogen) levels could indicate 
kidney damage, although urea levels also increase 
in other metabolic abnormalities that cause 
excessive breakdown of proteins. 
Creatinine concentration rarely rises due to 
metabolic diseases other than kidney disease so it’s 
a more reliable marker.  Blood levels of both 
metabolites could increase ten-fold in renal failure, 
the amount of increase being proportional to the 
extent of damage. This condition is called uremia 
and is accompanied with edema and acidosis.  The 
acidosis can lead to coma and death. Thus, 
excreting excess hydrogen ions is an essential 
function of the kidneys. 
 Inulin and PAH (para-amino hippuric 
acid) are molecules that can be administered to a 
patient and later the clearance of these mo lecules 
from the plasma can be measured using blood and 
urine samples to more accurately assess kidney 
function.  Once filtered, inulin is neither reabsorbed 
nor secreted, so it is used to calculate glomerular 
filtration rate.   PAH is also filtered at the 
glomerulus but, unlike inulin, the PAH that is not 
filtered is secreted into the tubules, so that more 
than 90% of that given is excreted.  Its clearance 
can be used to measure total blood flow  to the 
kidney.  
Clearance can be used to tell if a filtered 
molecule is subsequently secreted or reabsorbed. If 
the plasma clearance of a substance is less than the 
glomerular filtration rate (about 125 ml/min in a 
normal adult), then some must have been 
reabsorbed. If the plasma clearance of a substance 
is greater t hat the glomerular filtration rate, some 
additional amount must have been secreted into the 
urine.  
 In pyelography, radio -opaque substances 
are given and allowed to filter into the urine.  X-ray 
images then show the structure of the renal tubular 
system (calyces, pelvis, ureters, urinary bladder). 
 Measuring urine concentration (specific 
gravity) in response to varying water loads is a way 
of assessing the ability of the nephrons to 
concentrate urine, as shown in the demonstration 
described above.

===== PAGE 39 =====
35 
LESSON 12: BLOOD  
  
Blood is a connective tissue composed of 
cells suspended within a liquid intercellular matrix 
called plasma.   
FUNCTIONS 
 Blood provides a means of transport; 
transport for substances required to maintain 
homeostasis, and for transport of waste products. 
 Oxygen is carried to tissues from the lungs and 
carbon dioxide is carried to the lungs from the 
tissues. 
 Nutrients (glucose, amino acids, fats, vitamins, 
minerals, water) are transported to tissue cells. 
 Temperature is regulated by dissipating heat to 
dilated peripheral vessels. Constricting these 
vessels conserves heat. 
 Metabolic wastes are carried to the kidneys 
and passed into the urine. 
 Internal secretions including hormones are 
carried to target tissue. 
Blood helps to maintain homeostasis in other ways 
as well. 
 Normal hydrogen ion concentration (pH) is 
controlled, as blood is one of the body's acid -
base buffering systems. 
 Blood plays an active role in the body's 
phagocytic and immunologic defense 
mechanisms. 
CHARACTERISTICS 
Color: Oxygenated blood is bright red.  Blood low 
in oxygen is a darker bluish red. 
Quantity:  A person of average adult weight has 
about 5 liters of blood. 
Viscosity:  Cells and plasma proteins present in 
blood make it 3 to 4 times thicker than water.  If 
too many cells are present, blood becomes so 
viscous that circulation is impaired. 
Composition: Whole blood is normally composed 
of 52% to 58% plasma and 42% to 48% formed 
elements, the term used for blood cells.  These 
percentages can be determined by calculating the 
hematocrit, a measurement of the percent 
formed elements in blood.  A sample of whole 
blood in a glass capillary tube is centrifuged 
forcing the heavier formed elements to the 
bottom. The ratio of formed elements to total 
volume can then be mea sured.  The example in 
the figure shows a hematocrit of about 42.  That 
is, 42% of the blood 
is formed elements. 
Formed elements 
contain three cell 
types:  
erythrocytes also 
called red blood 
cells, RBCs, or red 
corpuscles, 
leukocytes also 
called white bloo d 
cells or WBCs, and 
thrombocytes also called platelets. 
pH:  Blood is just slightly alkaline; the pH is about 
7.4 with a normal range of from 7.35 to 7.45.  
Maintaining a normal pH is important because 
the biochemical reactions in the body tend to be 
pH dependent. 
ERYTHROCYTES 
 Red blood cells are bi -concave discs, 
thinner at the center than at the edges.  Mature red 
blood cells do not have nuclei. They are only 
slightly smaller tha n the lumen of capillaries and 
must travel through single file. Erythrocytes contain 
the vital molecule hemoglobin, consisting of a 
globular protein portion (globin) and four heme 
groups each able to combine with a molecule of 
oxygen. Oxygenated hemoglobin is referreeed   to  
as oxyhemoglobin. Deoxygenated hemoglobin is 
called reduced hemoglobin.  Cyanosis is the 
slightly bluish color of the skin due to the presence 
of abnormal amounts of reduced hemoglobin. 
Carbaminohemoglobin is hemoglobin with carbon 
dioxide bound to it.  Hemoglobin can also bind 
hydrogen ions, helping to contr ol blood pH.  
Carbon monoxide binds more tightly to hemoglobin 
than oxygen does and so causes oxygen starvation.  
The concentration of hemoglobin is about 14 grams 
per 100 ml of blood in females and 16 grams per 
100 ml in males. 
 Erythrocytes are formed in the hemopoietic 
tissue of the red bone marrow found primarily in 
the spongy bone of ribs, sternum, clavicles, 
vertebrae, skull and coxal (hip) bones.  Diagnostic 
samples of red marrow are normally taken by 
needle puncture from the sternum or coxal bones.

===== PAGE 40 =====
36 
 The precursor cell for all blood cells is the 
hemocytoblast.  In the case of red blood cells, the 
hemocytoblast develops into a rapidly dividing cell 
called the erythroblast.  As the erythroblast 
matures, the nucleus is lost and the cell is no longer 
able to divide.  Red cells released from the bone 
marrow are called reticulocytes. Within a day, they 
become erythrocytes. The presence of reticulocytes 
in the blood indicates active bone marrow.   
 Two B vitamins, vitamin B 12 and folic 
acid, are required for  DNA synthesis in dividing 
cells.  Since red cells divide more rapidly than any 
other cell, the first sign of B vitamin deficiency is a 
fall in red cell count.  The stomach lining contains 
intrinsic factor that promotes the absorption of 
vitamin B12.  The vitamin is stored in the liver and 
carried to the red marrow as needed.  About 2 
million erythrocytes are formed every second.  The 
liver and kidneys produce a hormone called 
erythropoietin that stimulates erythrocyte 
production. On sojourn to high altitud e, for 
example, erythropoietin release stimulates 
production of added red cells to compensate for 
reduced oxygen pressure in the atmosphere. 
 The average lifespan of erythrocytes is 120 
days.  They are destroyed in the hemopoietic tissue, 
liver and spleen.  The iron of hemoglobin is stored 
in the liver and the heme pigments passed into the 
bile as bilirubin and biliverdin for excretion with 
the feces. 
 There are about 4.5 million to 5.5 million 
erythrocytes per cubic millimeter of blood.  Of the 
estimated 75 trillion cells in the adult human body, 
a full 25 trillion are erythrocytes. 
 Anemia is a blood  abnormality associated 
with a decrease in red cell count Pernicious 
anemia is caused by poor B vitamin absorption due 
to lack of intrinsic factor in the stoma ch.  
Inadequate dietary iron causes iron deficiency 
anemia.  Aplastic anemia is caused by red marrow 
failure as can occur from radiation exposure.  
Sickle cell anemia is caused by substitution of 
improper amino acids in the hemoglobin molecules. 
Of the 574  amino acids found in a hemoglobin 
molecule, two are substituted.  The sickle shaped 
cells that have lost their strong biconcave shape, 
hemolyze very easily. Thus, sickle cell anemia is a 
type of hemolytic anemia.   
 Polycythemia is an increase in the 
concentration of red cells above normal.  A 
moderate polycythemia occurs on sojourn to high 
altitude. If polycythemia becomes too severe, 
circulation becomes impaired because the blood 
becomes too viscous.   
LEUKOCYTES 
 Leukocytes are nucleated blood cells.  
They act to protect the body against pathogens, 
foreign substances and tissue damage. Unlike 
erythrocytes, leukocytes can leave blood vessels 
and act directly in damaged or infected tissue.  
White cells are characterized by the unique shapes 
associated with their nucleus and the appearance of 
the cytoplasm which is classified as either granular 
or agranular. 
Granular leukocytes are of three types: 
 Neutrophils make up about 60% of the total 
number of white cells. Their granules stain pink 
in either acidic or alkaline stains.  Neutrophils 
are microphagocytes, engulfing small debris 
and bacterial cells.  Their number increases in 
bacterial infections . D ifferential white cell 
counts are often helpful in verifying the 
presence of an infection. 
 Eosinophils compose less than 3% of the total 
number of white cells.  Their granules stain red 
with acidic stains.  They are involved in 
detoxification of foreign proteins entering 
through the lungs and digestive system a nd 
their number rises in response to allergic 
reactions and parasitic infections.  
 Basophils make up less than 1% of while cells. 
Their granules stain blue with alkaline stains.  
Basophils act by releasing heparin and 
histamine at the site of tissue damage.  
Histamine is a vasoactive agent that increases 
blood flow to the affected area and allows the 
interstitial spaces to fill with fluid.  As the 
fluids accumulate, swelling occurs, helping to 
localize the injury by inhibiting the spread of 
toxins.  Heparin prevents the formation of 
blood clots helping to maint ain a continuous 
blood flow to damaged tissue.  
Agranular leukocytes lack cytoplasmic granules.  
There are two types: 
 Lymphocytes compose about 30% of the total 
number of white blood cells.  Lymphocytes are 
the key players in the more specific 
immunological defenses (the immune system).

===== PAGE 41 =====
37 
Some lymphocytes transform into antibod y 
cells (T Cells) that attack other cells marked 
with foreign antigens. Other lymphocytes (B 
cells) release humoral immunoglobulin proteins 
that act as antibodies against foreign antigens.   
 Monocytes are the largest of the white cells.  
They comprise about 5% of the white cell 
count. They act as macrophagocytes, 
engulfing large amounts of debris, digesting it 
with enzymes  from lysosomes . A thick 
yellowish fluid called pus is an accumulation of 
phagocytic end products digested by 
lysosomes.   
 Leukocytes are formed in red bone marrow 
from the same precursor cell s as the erythrocyte. 
Once released from the bone marrow, lymphocytes 
can also be  produced in organs of the lymphatic 
system. The re are normally 5,000 to 10,000 
leukocytes per cubic millimeter  of blood.  The 
normal life span for granular leukocytes is on the 
order of 10 to 12 hours.  Agranular leukocytes last 
much longer.  Monocytes function for weeks or 
months while lymphocytes can  remain active for 
years. 
 Neutorphils, basophils, eosinophils and 
monocytes are all important mediators of the 
inflammatory response that protects the body, in a 
general way, from a variety of invading pathogens. 
The response is characterized by heat and redness 
due to increased blood flow, edema (swelling) 
caused by increased capillary permeability and pain 
caused by chemicals released from damaged cells. 
Chemicals released by the damaged tissue actually 
attract leukocytes to the area, a process called 
chemotaxis.  Lymphocytes are mediators for the 
immune system to be discussed later. 
 A decrease in the number of circulating 
white cells is called leukopoenia.  It often occurs in 
typhoid fever, measles, mumps, influenza and 
exposure to certain types of radi ation.  
Leukocytosis is an increase in white cell count that 
normally occurs during infections, such as an 
appendicitis or mononucleosis, and represents a 
normal defensive response by the body. 
 Leukemia is cancer of the leukocytes.  In 
myeloid leukemia, the cells are derived from the 
bone marrow. In lymphoid leukemia, they’re 
associated with the lymph nodes. Despite increased 
numbers of cells associated with leukemia, the 
victim's resistance to infection is decreased 
because the cells are both anatomically  and 
functionally abnormal. If the cancerous cells 
proliferate in the bone marrow, production of 
erythrocytes and thrombocytes may be adversely 
affected leading to anemia and bleeding disorders.  
THROMBOCYTES 
 Hemostasis refers to the prevention of 
blood loss.  It is achieved by (1) vascular spasm, (2) 
formation of a platelet plug, (3) blood coagulation, 
and (4) growth of fibrous tissue across the vessel 
rupture.  Thrombocytes play a vital role in 
hemostasis. 
 Thrombocytes, also called platelets, are 
important for repairing the hundreds of small 
ruptures that occur throughout the vasculature each 
day.  They are fragments of large cells called 
megakaryocytes that are, like the other blood cells, 
derived from the hemocytoblasts in red bone 
marrow.  Being cell fragments, they have no nuclei 
and cannot divide.  The life span of a thrombocyte 
is about 10 days.  There are about 150,000 to 
350,000 platelets per cubic millimeter of blood.    
 At the site of a rupture, they physically act 
as plugs and in addition, rel ease serotonin, a 
vasoconstrictor that reduces blood flow in the 
damaged vessel by vascular spasm.  If a vascular 
rupture is too large, the thrombocytes alone cannot 
prevent blood loss.  However, the liver produces a 
group of clotting factors that assist t he platelets in 
the repair process. One of these factors is 
prothrombin.  The synthesis of prothrombin in the 
liver requires vitamin K.  Another factor produced 
by the liver is fibrinogen.  These factors circulate 
in inactive form in the plasma.  Damaged vessels 
release an activator substance  that causes 
prothrombin to be converted to thrombin, an active 
form.  Calcium ions are necessary for this 
activation.  Thus, they, along with vitamin K, are 
necessary for normal blood clotting.  The activation 
of prothrombin ultimately leads to the conversion of 
fibrinogen to fibrin.  Fibrin proteins form long 
strands that intertwine making a meshwork over the 
rupture, trapping platelets and forming a plug. The

===== PAGE 42 =====
38 
clotting mechanism is actually more complex than 
described here and requires many other protein 
intermediates. 
 Clotting abnormalities include hemophilia, 
a genetic disease characterized by lack of one of the 
clotting factors. As a result, vascular injuries 
usually lead to dangerous blood losses.  A 
stationary clot that actually plugs the vessel itself is 
called a thrombus.  An embolus is a wandering 
clot- one that has become dislodged from the vessel 
wall.  If an embolus becomes lodged in another 
vessel it can compromise flow to the affected organ. 
 Just as the b ody provides mechanisms to 
form clots that plug ruptured vessels, it also 
provides mechanisms to prevent unwanted clots 
from interfering with normal blood flow.  Rough 
surfaces stimulate clot formation. The smooth 
endothelial lining of all vessels helps prevent clots. 
 Heparin, an anticoagulant produced by basophils, 
controls clotting in areas of injury.  Another 
mechanism involves an inactive plasma protein 
called plasminogen that, when activated to 
plasmin, helps dissolve clots.  Tissue plasminogen 
activator (TPA) is used clinically to dissolve clots 
in the coronary and cerebral circulations. It is 
administered during an actual heart attack or stroke, 
often providing immediate restoration of blood flow 
to ischemic tissue. 
PLASMA 
 Plasma is the liquid inter cellular matrix of 
blood.  It is composed of water (about 92%), along 
with inorganic salts, hormones, respiratory gases, 
nutrients from digested foods, waste products from 
cellular metabolism and liver proteins.  The most 
abundant protein added by the live r is albumin. 
Albumin aids in maintaining colloidal osmotic 
pressure, the osmotic pressure necessary to prevent 
the water in plasma from escaping into the 
interstitial spaces, leading to edema. Protein carriers 
are needed to transport hydrophobic (lipid-soluble) 
molecules through plasma. Fats absorbed from the 
diet and lipid-soluble hormones are examples. The 
liver also deposits the clotting proteins into 
plasma, including prothrombin and fibrinogen . 
Plasma contains antibody proteins (gamma 
globulins) produced by B lymphocytes when they 
are exposed to certain foreign antigens . Through 
various mechanisms, antibody proteins neutralize 
foreign antigens.   
BLOOD GROUPS 
 Blood types are named for the antigens on 
the surface of the erythrocytes.  Antibodies against 
antigens not found on a person's own red cells 
would be found in that person's plasma.  Exposure 
of blood cell antigens to the antibodies that act 
against them would result in agglutination and 
hemolysis and potentially fatal vascular collapse. 
The most familiar blood group is the ABO group.  
A person’s blood cells can be marked with either A 
or B antigens, both A and B antigens, or neither 
antigen. Normally, types are matched in 
transfusions. In certain instances, a recipient may 
tolerate a transfusion from a donor with a different 
blood type.  In theory, type O is a universal donor 
and type AB is a universal recipient.  While type O 
plasma has antibodies against both A and B 
antigens, when the blood is transfused into a type 
AB person, the donated plasma becomes diluted by 
the recipient’s plasma and damage to the recipient's 
blood may be minimal.  However, upon transfusion 
of AB blood into a type O individual, the antibodies 
in the type O plasma would attack the transfused 
AB blood as it entered because AB blood cells have 
both A and B antigens on them. To ensure 
compatibility, blood samples are always cross -
matched before any is transfused. 
 Blood types are not evenly distributed in 
the population. Most (~47%) are type O, type A is 
~ 41%, type B ~ 9% and type AB is ~3%. 
 Another of the blood groups is the Rh 
group, first discovered in rhesus monkeys.  About 
85% of the human population is Rh positive (Rh+). 
They have no Rh antibodies and can receive either 
Rh+ or RH negative ( Rh−) blood.  For the 15% 
Rh−, if they are exposed to Rh+ blood they will 
develop antibodies against it.  If, for example, an 
Rh− female and Rh+ male conceive an Rh+ child, 
and during the course of pregnancy some of the 
fetal blood mixes with the maternal blood, the Rh− 
mother will develop antibodies against Rh+ blood.  
If in a subsequent pregnancy some of the maternal 
blood containing Rh+ antibodies mixes with the 
Rh+ fetal blood, the baby will have a blood reaction 
called erythroblastosis fetalis, a potentia lly fatal 
blood reaction.  The baby must be transfused with 
Rh− blood to sustain vascular function until the 
anti-Rh+ antibodies become inactive and the 
infant’s own Rh+ blood can function normally.

===== PAGE 43 =====
39 
LESSON 13:  THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 
  
The body has three defense mechanisms to 
protect against harmful pathogens.  The first are 
external barriers and would include the skin and 
mucous membranes that line all body cavities open 
to the exterior. The second line of defense includes 
those internal physiological me chanisms that 
protect us against pathogens, also in a general way. 
It includes phagocytosis, inflammation and fever. 
The above mechanisms are generally effective 
against a wide variety of pathogens. Skin keeps out 
all bacteria and most bacteria are unable to survive 
the higher temperatures associated with fever.  
The third line of defense  is the immune 
system, a line of defense that targets only one 
specific pathogen after a previous exposure to it. 
The system is characterized by the three ‘R’s: 
recognize, react, and remember . The immune 
response is initiated by exposure to antigens that 
are found on the surface of every living cell. 
Antigens are complex molecules unique to each 
person. They can be proteins, polysaccharides, 
glycoproteins or lipoproteins. As  the immune 
system develops, the body learns to recognize its 
own antigens, responding only to foreign antigens.  
Lymphocytes are the key players in the 
immune response. While all lymphocytes originate 
from red bone marrow and migrate to lymphatic 
tissue, they take two different pathways. The T 
lymphocytes pass from the bone marrow to the 
thymus gland, a gland found above the heart in 
infants and children. In the thymus gland, the T 
cells are “tested” and only those T lymphocytes 
that do not react with nati ve cells are released into 
the circulation. As a result of the selection 
process, thousands of T lymphocytes, each pre -
programmed to recognize a different group of 
antigens, are released into the circulation.  B cells 
undergo a similar selection process in the red bone 
marrow and then are passed directly to lymphatic 
tissue- the lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils and other 
lymphatic organs to await future activation.  
CELLULAR IMMUNITY 
 T lymphocytes provide protection by 
attacking cells marked with foreign antig ens 
directly. They have cell adhesion factors that 
allow them to bind directly to the cells to be 
destroyed. T lymphocytes  include cytotoxic T 
cells to carry out the attack, helper T cells to assist 
all other lymphocytes in carrying out destructive 
activities and memory T cells to initiate a quick 
response on future exposure to the specific foreign 
antigen.  
 For T cells to respond, they must first be 
presented with the antigen and be “programmed” 
to recognize it. Key to this process are major 
histocompatability (MHC) proteins  found on 
the surface of cells. There are two types.  
 MHC-I proteins are found on the surface 
of nearly all of our nucleated body cells. They 
display native peptides that identify our cells as 
uniquely belonging to us. T cells would no rmally 
not respond to native peptides displayed by MHC -
I proteins. However, if the proteins are modified 
by exposure to a virus or the result of cancer, a T 
cell response could be initiated.  
 MHC-II proteins are found only on cells 
called antigen presenti ng cells  (APCs), and 
display only foreign antigens. APCs include 
macrophages (phagocytic cells other than 
phagocytic blood cells), B lymphocytes and a few 
other cell types. The mechanism used by APCs to 
obtain and display antigens is as follows: 
1. The foreig n cell is ingested into a n APC by 
phagocytosis.  
2. Lysosomes fuse with the vesicle containing 
the foreign cell.  
3. Lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes then degrade 
the foreign cell. 
4. The antigen is also degraded. 
5. That piece of the antigen the serves as the 
recognition factor (called the epitope of the 
antigen) is carried to the MHC -II protein and 
displayed on the APC surface. 
6. The rest of the degraded cell leaves the APC 
by exocytosis.  
T lymphocytes binding to the MHC -II protein 
of the APC use the displayed epitope to program 
themselves to identify all foreign cells displaying 
the particular antigen on their surfaces. The 
programmed lymphocyte divides producing 
clones, each cloned cell ready to defend against 
cells with that particular foreign antigen.

===== PAGE 44 =====
40 
Cytotoxic T cell s bind to the marked foreign 
cells and deliver a lethal infusion of toxic 
chemicals to destroy it. Helper T cells, once 
programmed by the APC, assist by promoting T 
cell and B cell maturation and participating in B 
cell activation. Memory T cells persist i n the 
immune system and mount an immediate attack 
upon second exposure, usually so quickly that no 
noticeable illness occurs.  
HUMORAL IMMUNITY 
B lymphocytes provide protection 
indirectly by releasing protein antibodies into the 
bloodstream. The process occurs as follows: 
1. Foreign antigens bind to complimentary 
receptors on the surface of B cells. 
2. The antigen is taken into the B cell and 
degraded.  
3. The epitope of the antigen is displayed on the 
surface of the B cells by MHC-II proteins. 
4. A T helper cell binds  to the MCH -protein 
complex and releases interleukin.  
5. Interleukin stimulates the programmed B cell 
to divide repeatedly forming clones. 
6. Some clones become memory B-cells, held in 
reserve for future exposures. 
7. Most clones develop into large plasma cells. 
8. Plasma cells produce and release large 
quantities of antibody protein that render the 
antigen harmless in different ways. 
Plasma cells develop mostly within lymph 
nodes although only 10% remain there. The cells 
remain viable for 4 or 5 days and produce 
antibody proteins at a rate of about 2,000 per 
second throughout their lifetime. That explains the 
cells’ very highly developed rough endoplasmic 
reticulum densely covered with ribosomes. 
ANTIBODY PROTEINS 
The antibody proteins produced by plasma 
cells are ref erred to as immunoglobulins (Ig). The 
most common types are IgE responsible for the 
histamine release that initiates asthma attacks, 
IgM that initiates a relatively weak and delayed 
response on first exposure to a foreign antigen, 
and IgG (80% of immunoglo bulin proteins) 
responsible for the immediate and strong response 
on subsequent exposures. 
Antibodies attack antigens and antigenic 
cells through different mechanisms . They can 
neutralize the antigen by masking its active site. 
They can bind to foreign cel ls, marking them for 
phagocytosis (most common). The y can bind 
foreign cells together, a process called 
agglutination. They can cause free antigen 
molecules to precipitate out and be removed by 
phagocytes.  
IMMUNE SYSTEM PROBLEMS 
 Sometimes, the immune res ponse is 
stronger than expected. This is a hypersensitivity 
reaction. Asthma would be an example. Another 
would be anaphylactic shock  in which allergens 
entering the blood cause constriction of small 
airways, massive vasodilation and severe drop in  
blood pressure. 
 Autoimmune disease refers to the 
production of antibodies against the body’s own 
tissues. This could result from structural changes 
in self -antigens or from cross -reactivity. Damage 
to heart tissue often occurs in rheumatic fever 
when the antibod ies that form to attack the 
bacteria, cross-react with heart tissue. 
 HIV virus attacks T helper cells needed 
for the activation of both T and B lymphocytes. 
ACQUIRING IMMUNITY 
 There are four ways of acquiring 
immunity from foreign pathogens. Two are acti ve 
mechanisms, requiring exposure to a foreign 
antigen. Upon exposure, the body develops an 
antibody against it. Two are passive, in which an 
antibody specific to a particular antigen is 
introduced directly into the body.  
 Natural active immunity occurs w hen the 
body is exposed to a foreign antigen during 
normal activities. Exposure to a virus as a result of 
poor hygiene would be an example. Artificial 
active immunity can be induced by purposely 
exposing body tissue to a non-virulent strain of the 
antigen- getting a flu shot, for example.  
 Natural passive immunity occurs when 
antibodies against foreign antigens are passed 
directly from one person to another. During 
breast-feeding, mother passes protective 
antibodies contained in breast milk directly to her  
infant. In artificial passive immunity, antibodies, 
not antigens, are injected into the body. A tetanus 
shot would be an example.

===== PAGE 45 =====
41 
LESSON 14:  PULMONARY VENTILATION AND PERFUSION 
   
The process of producing ATP within the 
mitochondria by “burning” glucose is referred to as 
internal respiration. Oxygen (O2) is required and 
carbon dioxide (CO2) is produced as a waste 
product. The process of external respiration  
associated with the lungs, provides a means of 
supplying the oxygen and disposing of the carbon 
dioxide.  To accomplish this, three processes come 
together in the lungs:  ventilation (getting gas in 
and out), perfusion (bringing blood through the 
lung), and diffusion (exchanging gases between air 
and blood). 
THE RESPIRATORY TRACT 
In discussing the respiratory tract, there are 
three types of tissue that are of particular 
importance: cartilage for support, muscle to 
control airway diameter, and mucous membranes 
to provide mucus to condition the air and serve as a 
first line of defense.  In the larynx, these tissues are 
also important in production of sound. 
As air enters the nasal passage, mixing 
begins the humidification and warming process. 
The air passes over the warm moist layer of mucus 
produced by the cells lining the respiratory tract. 
The air passes through the pharynx (throat) and 
enters the larynx, the opening to the respiratory 
tract.    
 The larynx is supported by cartilages 
joined with ligaments. The larynx contains the 
vocal cords  formed by tight folds of mucous 
membrane. The slit  between the vocal cords is 
called the glottis.  Sounds are produced by forcing 
air through the glottis causing the vocal cords to 
vibrate. The pitch of the sound is controlled by 
changing the tension on the cords; accomplished by 
moving the cartilages wit h the voluntary skeletal 
muscles of the larynx. The trachea extends down 
from the larynx anterior to the esophagus. It is 
supported by cartilaginous rings that are incomplete 
on the posterior side. They prevent the trachea from 
fully collapsing , yet allow enough flexibility to 
accommodate expansion of the esophagus during 
swallowing.   
 Inferiorly, the tracheal division of airways 
into smaller and smaller branches begins. In the 
first division, two primary bronchi form to ventilate 
the right and left lungs.  In all, there are about 20 
generations of airways finally leading to alveolar 
ducts that open to the terminal air sacs called the 
alveoli.  Cartilage in various configurations is 
found in all but the smallest airways to minimize 
collapse. The cells lining the airways secrete mucus 
that acts not only to warm and moisten air but also 
to trap inhaled particulates. The cells have little 
bristles called cilia on their luminal surface that 
beat in unison, sending the particulate-laden mucus 
up the airways and out of the lung.  
 Smooth muscle in the airways controls the 
diameter and thereby regulates the amount of air 
delivered and the distribution of air. Areas of the 
lung that are poorly perfused will contain reduced 
amounts of CO 2 in their alveoli and airways. 
Reduced levels of CO 2 cause airways to constrict. 
In this way, more of the air is distributed to regions 
of the lung that are better perfused. 
 Alveoli have no cartilage, muscle or mucus 
membranes. They are composed of a single layer of 
flattened cells des igned to facilitate gas exchange 
by diffusion. 
VENTILATION 
 The lungs are located in the pleural cavities 
of the thorax.  These are closed cavities, and in a 
closed system, the product of pressure times 
volume is constant.  Air is brought into the lungs by 
decreasing the pressure below atmospheric.  In a 
closed cavity, increasing the volume has the effect 
of decreasing the pressure.  The primary sets of 
respiratory muscles that contract to increase the 
volume of the thorax are the diaphragm and the 
external intercostal muscles- the muscles of 
inspiration.  The diaphragm is a broad, flat muscle 
that separates the thoracic from the abdominal 
cavity and the intercostal muscles are found 
between the ribs. The negative pressure created by 
contraction of these mus cles draws air into the 
lungs.  Relaxation of these muscles expels gas from 
the lungs.  Forceful expiration can be produced by 
contraction of the muscles of expiration including 
the internal intercostal  muscles and abdominal 
muscles. 
 The expansion of the lungs is facilitated by 
the cohesion of the lungs to the walls of the thorax.

===== PAGE 46 =====
42 
 The lungs are not physically attached to the walls 
of the thorax, but are floating in a thin layer of 
liquid called serous fluid.  The liquid acts as a 
lubricant.  It reduces friction when the outer surface 
of the lung is sliding back and forth against the 
cavity wall. But when the rib cage is moving away 
from the surface of the lungs, serous fluid causes 
the lungs to adhere to the cavity wall, expanding as 
the chest wall expands.  
Respiratory pressures can be  expressed 
relative to atmospheric pressure; negative pressure 
means less than atmospheric and positive means 
greater than atmospheric. As illustrated in the figure 
below, the pressure in the pleural cavity (pleural 
pressure) is negative during quiet breathing. On 
contraction of the inspiratory muscles, it drops from 
about -5 cm H2O to -7.5 cm H2O.  Between breaths, 
when there is no airflow, alveolar pressure is zero.  
Expansion of the chest reduces pressure on 
the outside o f the lung. That, along with 
lung cohesion to the cavity walls, causes the 
lungs to expand. Upon expansion, the 
alveolar pressure becomes about 1 cm H2O 
negative and air rushes in.  Relaxation of 
the inspiratory muscles compresses the 
lungs bringing alveolar pressure about 1 cm 
H2O above atmospheric, forcing air out. 
The elastic nature of lung tissue also aids in 
emptying the lungs.  When the muscles 
relax, elastic recoil of the lung tissue forces air out. 
 The volume of gas exchanged in a quiet breath, 
referred to as the “tidal volume” is about 500 ml. 
 The difference between the alveolar 
pressure and pleural pressure is called the 
transpulmonary pressure.  Before inspiration it's 
about 5 cm H2O and at the end of inspiration it's 7.5 
cm H2O.  The amount of air that can be moved into 
or out of the lungs with a given transpulmonary 
pressure provides a measure of the compliance of 
the lung.  Loss of compliance is associated with a 
stiff lung that requires more work to inflate. In the 
example above, 500 ml was moved in and out of the 
lungs with 2.5 cm H2O (7.5 − 5) giving the normal 
average adult compliance of 200 ml/cm H 2O 
(500/2.5).   
 There are two principle forces that have to 
be overcome to inflate the lungs - elastic tissue 
forces and surface tension forces.  Because the lung 
is air -filled, there is a liquid air interface that 
always implies surface tension. Actually, the 
surface tension accounts for about two-thirds of the 
forces that resist inflation . At the interface, water 
molecules on the surface are more strongly attracted 
to water molecules below than to the air molecules 
above.  As a result, the surface tends to contract, to 
minimize the interface with air, making inflation 
more difficult.  Certain alveolar cells secrete a 
surfactant (surface active a gent) that caots the 
inner surface of alveoli and reduces surface tension. 
The surfactant dipalmitoyl lecithin  not only 
reduces surface tension but also helps stabilize the 
population of different sized alveoli as follows:  
The relationship between pressur e, tension and 
radius is expressed by the Law of Laplace. 
 
 
 
INSPIRATION: 
                                                              COHESION OF                          INTRA-ALVEOLAR 
                                                                  SEROUS            LUNGS       PRESSURE 
DIAPHRAGM &                                  MEMBRANES            EXPAND         NEGATIVE 
INTERCOSTALS       THORAX                                                                          
   CONTRACT              EXPANDS    INTRA-PLEURAL                                AIR ENTERS 
                                                            PRESSURE FALLS                              THE LUNGS  
 
 
EXPIRATION: 
                                                                   ELASTIC                                INTRA -ALVEOLAR 
                                                                   RECOIL             LUNGS      PRESSURE 
DIAPHRAGM &             SIZE OF           OF LUNGS             SHRINK          POSITIVE 
INTERCOSTALS       THORAX                                                                        
    RELAX                     REDUCED    INTRA-PLEURAL                               AIR LEAVES 
                                                            PRESSURE RISES                              THE LUNGS

===== PAGE 47 =====
43 
All alveoli are not the same size, yet all are exposed 
to the same pressure.  According to the equation 
above, if tension were constant (that is, the same in 
the walls of all alveoli), small alveol i would have 
greater pressure and therefore collapse into larger 
ones.   To prevent this, as radius increases, tension 
would have to increase as well, allowing pressure to 
be the same.  This, in fact, occurs.  As the alveoli 
expand, the layer of surfactant  thins out and the 
surface tension increases.  Another factor that keeps 
alveoli from collapsing is the interdependence of 
lung tissue.  All alveoli are interconnected and help 
support each other. 
 A final note- the chest wall also has tissue 
that needs to be expanded to inflate the lung.  The 
chest wall compliance is about the same magnitude 
as lung compliance: 200 ml/cm H 2O.  Considering 
both compliances, a cm H2O would only move 100 
ml of air into the lung. 
LUNG VOLUMES AND CAPACITIES 
 Lung volumes are e asily measured using 
spirometry.  A spirometer is essentially a canister 
open at the bottom, inserted into a water -filled 
canister open at the top. By inserting a breathing 
tube into the airspace created, inspiration and 
expiration causes the upper canister to move up and 
down. The excursions can be calibrated to provide a 
measure of volume. 
 Total lung capacity  (TLC) is about 5.8 
liters in a normal young adult.  Tidal volume (TV) 
is the amount of air inhaled and exhaled in quiet 
breathing.  It's about 0.5 liters.  The maximum 
amount of air that can be inhaled after a TV 
inspiration is the inspiratory reserve volume  
(IRV).  It's about 3 liters.  The total volume of air 
that can be forcefully exhaled after a TV expiration 
is expiratory reserve volume  (ERV).  It's about 
1.1 liters.   The reserve volumes are available 
during times of stress , including exercise . A 
residual volume (RV), about 1.2 liters, remains in 
the lungs even after a maximal expiration.  
 Lung capacities are combinations of lung 
volumes.  For example, vital capacity  (VC) is 
IRV+TV+ERV and equals about 4.6 liters.  It 
represents the maximum amount of air available for 
ventilation per single breath.  Total lung capacity 
is VC+RV and equals 5.8 liters. 
 The volume of gas in the lungs at the end 
of a quiet expiration when all respiratory muscles 
are relaxed is functional residual capacity (FRC). 
 (FRC=RV+ERV) It's measured by helium dilution; 
breathing a known volume (V) of gas with a known 
concentration (C) of helium added. To calculate, 
initial (i) and final (f) concentrations are measured:                             
                FRC = [(CiHe/CfHe)-1] x Vi 
 
 So, if a 5 liter spirometer begins with 10% 
helium and the concentration drops to 7% after 
equilibration with FRC, FRC would be 2.15 lite rs. 
By subtracting ERV  (determined by spirometry ) 
from FRC, the value of RV can be calculated. 
 While normal TV is about 500 ml, not all 
of that volume reaches the alveoli.  Some fills the 
respiratory dead space.  Dead space volume  
includes the volume of t he conducting airways 
where gas exchange doesn't occur, as well as any 
ventilated alveoli that aren't being perfused.  Dead 
space volume is about 150 ml.  The rest, about 350 
ml, is the alveolar volume- the portion of tidal 
volume that actually participates in gas exchange. 
 Lung ventilation is based both on volumes 
and respiratory rate.  If we assume a respiratory rate 
of 12 breaths per minute, then the total ventilation 
during quiet breathing (called minute ventilation)

===== PAGE 48 =====
44 
would be 0.5 liters/breath times 12  breaths/minute, 
or 6 liters/minute.  But only 350 ml actually 
participates in gas exchange.  Alveolar ventilation 
is 0.35 times 12, or 4.2 liters/minute and dead space 
ventilation is 0.15 times 12, or 1.8 liters/minute.  A 
normal breathing pattern is refe rred to as eupnea.  
Apnea is temporary cessation of breathing.  
Dyspnea is labored breathing. 
 Ventilatory problems are classified as 
obstructive or restrictive. Obstructive lung  
diseases are characterized by difficulty in moving 
air into or out of the lungs.  In asthma, exposure to 
certain allergens can cause sudden and 
disproportionate constriction of airway smooth 
muscle. In bronchitis excessive production of 
mucus can form plugs in airways.  Another example 
is pulmonary emphysema, a condition caused by 
smoking.  Emphysema is associated with a loss of 
elastic tissue and therefore a loss of elastic recoil.  
As a result, increased amounts of air become 
trapped in the lung.  Residual volume increases and 
alveolar ventilation decreases. The increased 
pleural pressure required during expiration to 
compensate for lost elastic recoil squeezes airways 
closed resulting in the obstructive nature of the 
disease. 
 Restrictive lung diseases result in a 
decrease in lung compliance.  The lungs become 
stiff.  Premature in fants born with insufficient 
surfactant suffer from infant respiratory distress 
syndrome (IRDS).  Surface tension causes alveoli 
to collapse after each breath.  Breathing requires a 
great deal of effort because, like a balloon, it is 
difficult to get a col lapsed alveolus to begin to 
inflate.  Loss of compliance due to elastic tissue 
forces would include any of the fibrotic lung 
diseases (pulmonary fibrosis). 
 Persons with obstructive lung disease have 
difficulty moving air through airways. They 
minimize the  respiratory effort by taking deep 
breaths at low frequency. They do this because 
increasing tidal volume increases alveolar volume 
but dead space volume does not change 
significantly. Taking 8 deep breaths rather than 12 
would reduce dead space ventilatio n from 1.8 
L/min to 1.2 L/min (0.15 liters x 8), or 0.6 liters less 
air that has to go through narrowed airways.  
 Those with a restrictive disease have 
difficulty expanding their lungs.  They minimize 
effort by taking shallow breaths at higher 
frequency.  Taking 16 shallow breaths rather than 
12 normal breaths increases dead space ventilation 
from 1.8 L/min to 2.4 L/min.  That's more work 
moving unused dead space air, but at least they 
don't have to expand their stiff lungs as much. 
PERFUSION 
 Half the blood pumped by the heart passes 
to the lungs through the pulmonary artery.  That is, 
the cardiac output of the right and left ventricles is 
the same. The flow to the lungs at rest is therefore 
about 5 liters/min in a normal adult.  The pressures 
and their ch anges during the cardiac cycle on the 
pulmonary side of the circulation are basically the 
same as in the systemic circulation except that the 
magnitude of the pressures is about one -sixth that 
on the systemic side.     
 About 9% of the blood volume is foun d in 
the lungs; that's about 450 ml.  Of that, about 70 ml 
is in the capillaries where exchange of gases occurs. 
 Considering the lung capillaries are approximately 
1500 miles long, one ml of blood is stretched out 
over a distance of about 10 miles, illust rating why 
the lung is such an efficient gas exchanger.  Total 
surface area for gas exchange is about 160 m 2, or 
about the size of a tennis court.   
 Pulmonary circulation is controlled 
neurally and humorally and by autoregulation. 
However, autoregulation is different in the lungs.  
In systemic circulation, hypoxia causes arterioles to 
dilate, allowing more blood to perfuse the oxygen-
poor region. In the lungs, hypoxia causes vessels to 
constrict, decreasing blood flow to that area. For 
the lung, hypoxic areas are the areas that are poorly 
ventilated. Constriction diverts blood away from 
poorly ventilated areas and toward better ventilated 
areas. 
 Finally, gas exchange is not the only 
function of the lungs. Since the pulmonary 
circulation receives such a hig h percentage of the 
blood flow (50%), it is the logical site for locating 
metabolic enzymes.  For example, the enzymes that 
convert angiotensin I to angiotensin II are located 
on the cells lining the capillaries of the lungs.  
Other vasoactive agents found  in the blood are 
metabolized on passage through the lungs.  In 
addition, antioxidant enzymes in the lungs help 
protect the body tissues from the harmful effects of 
excess oxidation.

===== PAGE 49 =====
45 
LESSON 15:  PULMONARY GAS EXCHANGE 
 
DIFFUSION  
 Gas exchange occurs between the air in 
the alveoli and the blood in the pulmonary 
capillaries by simple diffusion.  The process of 
diffusion was discussed in an earlier le sson.   
Recall that the parameters that influence diffusion 
can be summarized by  
 While the solubility coefficient (S), 
temperature (T), and molecular weight of 
respiratory gasses (MW) wouldn't be expected to 
change or change enough to cause diffusion 
problems, the pressure gradient (P 1-P2), 
the surface area (A) of the respiratory 
membrane or its thickness (d), could all 
change sufficiently to impair diffusion in 
lung disease. 
 Note that the gradient for 
diffusion is the difference in the pressure 
of a given gas across the membrane.  The 
pressure exerted by any one gas in a 
mixture of gases is called the partial 
pressure of the gas.  In air, it is simply the 
percent concentration times the total gas 
pressure.  For example, if air is 21% 
oxygen and the total atmospheric pressure 
is 760 mmHg, then the PO 2 (partial pressure of 
oxygen) is 760 mmHg × 0.21 or 160 m mHg.  The 
PCO2 of air is negligible. In alveolar gas, the PO 2 
is reduced to about 104 mmHg and the PCO 2 is 
increased to 40 mmHg.  This is because the CO 2 
in the blood perfusing the alveoli is continuously 
diffusing into the alveoli and O 2 is continuously 
being carried away.  Also, the water vapor 
pressure increases from about 3 mmHg in air to 47 
mmHg in alveoli.  This is because inspired gas is 
warmed to 37oC and saturated with water vapor as 
it passes over the moist membranes of the airways. 
   Expired gas PO2 is about 120 mmHg and 
PCO2 is 27 mmHg because expired gas is a 
mixture of alveolar gas and air from the anatomic 
dead space.  Expired gas is 100% saturated with 
water vapor. 
 Blood leaving the lungs through the 
pulmonary capillaries is completely equi librated 
with alveolar gas.  That is, the PO 2 is 104 mmHg 
and the PCO 2 is 40 mmHg.  By the time the blood 
passes through the pulmonary veins to the left 
heart, the oxygen PO 2 has already fallen a bit, 
partly because some low O 2 blood that does not 
come in contact with pulmonary capillaries is 
added.   Systemic arterial PO 2 is normally about 
95 mmHg.  As it passes from systemic arteries 
through the systemic capillaries, oxygen is 
removed and carbon dioxide added. This is 
reflected in the mixed venous blood v alues, blood 
that ultimately will be returned to the lungs  
through the pulmonary artery.  The mixed venous 
(and pulmonary arterial) PO2 is reduced to 40 
mmHg and the PCO2 is increased to 45 mmHg. 
THE RESPIRATORY MEMBRANE 
 The barrier for diffusion consists  of the 
tissues of the capillary and alveolar walls.  
Together, these tissues are called the respiratory 
membrane.  Specifically, moving from air to 
blood, the gases must cross a layer of surfactant, the 
alveolar epithelium consisting of a single layer of 
flattened epithelial cells, an epithelial basement 
membrane, a layer of interstitial fluid, the capillary 
basement membrane and the capillary endothelium 
also composed of a single layer of flattened cells.  
The total thickness of the respiratory membrane 
averages about 0.6 microns and is as thin as 0.2 
microns in places.  The capillary diameters average 
about 8 micro ns so red cells must actually move 
through single file, providing easy access for gases. 
 In the normal adult lung there are about 
300 million alveoli, each covered with a network of 
capillaries.  The total surface area of all respiratory 
D  (P1 – P2)  S  T A
MW  d

===== PAGE 50 =====
46 
membranes combined is about 160 meters 2, about 
the size of a tennis court.  
FACTORS AFFECTING DIFFUSION 
 The parameters that affect diffusion are 
found in the equation discussed above.  Several can 
change in lung disease and result in diffusion 
impairment.  One factor that doesn't change but is 
important is the solubility coefficient.   Carbon 
dioxide is about 20 times more soluble in plasma 
than is oxygen.  The refore, for all practical 
purposes, the factors described below will only 
produce a noticeable effect on oxygen diffusion. 
 The greater the pressure gradient for 
oxygen, the greater the rate of diffusion.  
Hemoglobin helps to maintain the pressure 
gradient by acting as a "sink" for oxygen in the 
alveolus. That is, as soon as oxygen enters the 
plasma and diminishes the pressure gradient, 
hemoglobin removes it from the plasma, restoring 
the gradient.  This continues until hemoglobin is 
saturated. If less hemoglobin is available (anemia, 
for example) the hemoglobin saturates sooner and 
less oxygen can enter the plasma before the 
gradient disappears.  
 The shorter the distance, the greater the 
rate of diffusion.  Pulmonary edema, the 
accumulation of fluid between the cell layers of the 
respiratory membrane, increases the thickness and 
decreases the rate of diffusion.  Fibrotic lung 
diseases result in deposits of fibrous tissue on the 
membrane, increasing thickness and decreasing 
diffusion rate.   
 The rate of dif fusion is directly 
proportional to the total cross sectional area.  Lung 
diseases that would require surgical removal of lung 
tissue would decrease the rate of diffusion by 
reducing surface area.  Certain lung diseases like 
emphysema cause deterioration of  alveolar 
membranes and reduction of surface area.  But it is 
the mismatch of ventilation and perfusion that is the 
usual cause of lost functional surface area.  That is, 
portions of the membrane that are ventilated but not 
perfused or perfused but not ven tilated, cannot 
exchange gas.   
 While only small adverse changes in the 
respiratory membrane are required to impair 
performance during exercise, as much as 25 to 35% 
of the membrane could be lost before a deficit 
would be noticed at rest.  Similarly, the membrane 
can undergo considerable thickening before the 
ability to transfer oxygen at rest would be impaired. 
DIFFUSING CAPACITY 
 Perfusion and ventilation are regulated so 
that the body receives exactly as much oxygen as it 
requires.  At rest, the requir ement is about 230 
ml/min.  The ability of the lungs to exchange 
oxygen can be quantified using the diffusing 
capacity measurement.  Diffusing capacity (DL) is 
the amount of gas exchanged per minute (D) per 
mmHg of pressure gradient PA – Pc bar.   
 For oxygen, the amount transferred at rest 
is about 230 ml/min, and the PO2 difference is 
about 11 mmHg.  That is, on average, the PO2 in 
the alveoli is only 11 mmHg higher than that in the 
capillary blood (refer to the graph below). Dividing 
230 ml/min by 11 mmHg gives the normal resting 
diffusing capacity for oxygen of 21 
ml/min/mmHg.   
 The resting diffusing capacity for oxygen 
does not represent the maximum rate at which the 
lung can exchange oxygen.  During severe exercise, 
the lungs can increase oxygen de livery by more 
than ten-fold.  As we shall see about 97% of the 
oxygen carried out of the lungs is transported by 
hemoglobin, and when hemoglobin leaves the lungs 
it is 100% saturated with oxygen.  Therefore, to 
increase oxygen delivery by ten times requires that 
more hemoglobin be transported to the lungs and/or 
that more oxygen be bound to the hemoglobin 
 - 
 
DL =

===== PAGE 51 =====
47 
molecule.  During exercise, blood flow to the lungs 
(cardiac output) can increase by at least four times 
to 20 L/min. (Resting cardiac output is 5 L/min. )  
To accommodate the increased flow, additional 
capillaries in the lung open up and ventilation 
increases to bring air to the newly opened 
capillaries.  Additionally, increased oxygen demand 
by the tissues means that the hemoglobin returning 
to the lung is less saturated with oxygen than at rest, 
so more oxygen can be added to each available 
hemoglobin molecule.  The effect is that the 
diffusing capacity for oxygen increases to about 65 
ml/min/mmHg in strenuous exercise.  
  Under resting conditions, the PO2 of blood 
entering the lung is about 40 mmHg at rest and the 
PO2 of blood leaving the lung is equal to that of 
alveolar gas; about 100 mmHg. This is shown in the 
figure below. We can’t measure PO2 at 
intermediate points, but two possible alternatives 
are presented in curves A and B. If PO2 increased 
linearly over the entire range, as in curve B, the 
average capillary PO2 would be 70 mmHg. 
[(40+100)/2]  But, if DL is 21 ml/min/mmHg, and D 
is 230 ml/min and P A is 100 mmHg,  then the 
average PO2 must be (100 -11) or 89 mmHg. The 
average PO2 for curve A is 
 
 [(40+100+100+100)/4] = 85 
This is much closer to the expected value of 89 
mmHg. Therefore, the average must be weighted 
toward higher values; meaning blood PO2 must 
approach 100 mmHg very rapidly. 
 According to the figure, by the time blood 
has traveled about a third of the distance through 
the pulmonary capillaries, it is already fully 
equilibrated with oxygen at rest.  This means that 
during exercise when blood flow increases and 
blood spends less time in contact with the 
respiratory membrane, there is still ample time to 
fully equilibrate the blood with alveolar gas.   
 The figure also says something about 
diffusion impairment caused by damage to the 
respiratory membrane. As the damage progresses, 
curve A begins to shift gradually toward curve B. If 
it reaches curve B, then diffusion capacity would be 
about 8 ml/min/mmHg, about 1/3 the normal value. 
And yet, according to the figure, the blood at the 
outlet would still be full equilibrated with oxygen. 
That is, at rest, the victims would not exhibit any 
shortness of breath. But they would have noticed a 
gradual decline in the ability to exert themselves 
until, when curve B is reached, any exertion at all 
will lead to shortness of breath. Lung disease 
caused by smoking, for example, goes completely 
undetected until its later stages in persons who are 
not very active.  
 Hemoglobin saturates with oxygen, so any 
additional oxygen that may be available in the 
alveoli can only be transferred to plasma. And 
oxygen is  very insoluble in plasma. Whereas 
oxygen carrying capacity of the blood is limited by 
the amount of hemoglobin available, carbon dioxide 
is transported in such a way that the more CO 2 
available, the more the blood can carry.  So besides 
being 20 times mor e soluble than oxygen, CO 2 
transport is not carrier limited.  This is another 
reason why diffusion impairment does not affect 
the exchange of CO 2.  Oxygen transport, on the 
other hand, is blood flow dependent. To increase 
oxygen delivery, blood flow must b e increased to 
deliver more and more  unsaturated hemoglobin 
molecules.

===== PAGE 52 =====
48 
LESSON 16: TRANSPORT OF OXYGEN AND CARBON DIOXIDE 
 
OXYGEN TRANSPORT 
 Oxygen is transported in the bloodstream in 
two ways.  More than 97% of the oxygen is carried 
as ox yhemoglobin. Oxygen binds with the iron 
molecule found on the heme groups of the 
hemoglobin molecules within the red blood cells.  
Each molecule of hemoglobin has four iron -
containing heme groups; each iron is able to bind a 
single oxygen molecule. A molecule of hemoglobin 
can therefore carry four oxygen molecules when 
fully saturated.  Less than 3% of oxygen is 
transported in blood as oxygen dissolved in the 
plasma. 
 Oxygen binds somewhat loosely to the 
hemoglobin.  At a P O2 of about 100 mmHg, the 
hemoglobin is fully saturated with oxygen.  As the 
PO2 falls, so does the percent saturation of 
hemoglobin.  That is, in the lungs where the PO2 is 
high (the result of ventilation), oxygen binds to 
hemoglobin and in the body tissues where the P O2 
is low (the resul t of consumption of oxygen by 
mitochondria), hemoglobin releases oxygen.   
 The relationship between PO2 and 
saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen is depicted in 
the curve below - the oxygen -hemoglobin 
dissociation curve.  Note the hemoglobin saturation 
at two important P O2 values. At 95 mmHg, the 
normal P O2 of systemic arterial blood, the 
hemoglobin is nearly 100 % saturated.  At 40 
mmHg, the normal P O2 of mixed venous blood at 
rest, the saturation is still 75%.  This is another 
oxygen reserve the body can rely upon during times 
of increased activity. Note that the PO2 has to fall 
below 60-70 mmHg before significant unloading of 
oxygen from the blood occurs. 
 On average, 100 ml of blood contains 15 
grams of hemoglobin (in males, closer to 16 
gm/100 ml, in fem ales closer to 14 gms/100 ml), 
and a gram of hemoglobin holds 1.34 ml of oxygen 
when fully saturated. Arterial blood hemoglobin is 
about 97% saturated with oxygen so 
    Bound = 15 gm/100ml × 1.34 ml/gm × 0.97 
                = 19.5 ml/100 ml of blood 
That is, every 100 ml of systemic arterial blood 
contains about 19.5 ml of oxygen.    
 Oxygen is not very soluble in plasma.  The 
solubility coefficient is 0.003 ml of oxygen/100 ml 
of blood/mmHg.  The PO2 of arterial blood is about 
95 mmHg so 
Dissolved = 95 mmHg x 0.003 ml/100ml/mmHg 
                 = 0.28 ml/100 ml of blood 
The total amount of oxygen carried in arterial blood 
is 19.8 ml/100 ml blood.  How much oxygen is 
carried in venous blood if the PO2 is 40 mmHg and 
the hemoglobin saturation is 75%? Subst ituting 
0.75 for 0.97 in the “bound” equation above gives 
15.07 ml/100 ml. Substituting 40 mmHg for 95 
mmHg in the “dissolved” equation gives 0.12 
ml/100 ml. The total carried in mixed venous blood 
is 15.2 ml/100 ml. Therefore, on average, the 
tissues consumed 4.6 ml of oxygen from every 100 
ml of blood. If 100 ml is only 1/50th the total blood 
flowing through the capillaries per minute (cardiac 
output is 5000 ml/min), then the total amount of 
oxygen consumed per minute is 4.6 x 50 or about 
230 ml/min.  Thi s was the value we used in 
calculating diffusing capacity earlier.  
 During exercise, the P O2 can easily fall to 
15 mmHg in mixed venous blood.  Using the above 
calculations, you would find that about three times 
as much oxygen is extracted from each 100 m l of 
blood during exercise.  When you consider that 
cardiac output can also increase by 3 or 4 times, 
oxygen delivery can easily accommodate a ten-fold 
increase in oxygen consumption during exercise, as 
we assumed in calculating the diffusing capacity 
during exercise. Yet, during exercise, delivery of 
oxygen by the blood is normally the limiting factor.

===== PAGE 53 =====
49 
CARBON DIOXIDE TRANSPORT 
 Carbon dioxide is 20 times more soluble in 
plasma than is oxygen . C arbon dioxide is 
transported in different ways than oxygen and 
within the ranges of CO2 found in the body. Blood 
can accept all the CO 2 released from the 
mitochondria.  For oxygen, once hemoglobin is 
saturated, very little additional oxygen can be 
transported.  For these reasons, CO 2 is held in the 
plasma at lower pressures and diffusion impairment 
is not a problem. 
 Carbon dioxide is added to the blood in the 
systemic tissue capillaries.  The main source of CO2 
in tissues is the mitochondria where CO 2 is 
produced as a waste in the oxidation of glucose.  
Because of con tinuing mitochondrial production, 
the PCO2 within the tissue cells is about 45 mmHg 
while the PCO2 in arterial blood entering the tissue 
capillaries is 40 mmHg.  As the blood passes from 
artery to vein, it equilibrates with the tissue value 
and increases t o 45 mmHg.  The amount of CO 2 
added under resting conditions is about 4 ml/100ml 
of blood.  Recall that the amount of O 2 consumed 
was nearly 5 ml/100ml of blood.  The ratio of CO 2 
produced to O 2 consumed is 1.0 only if 
carbohydrates are used as the "fuel" source.  Since 
we normally also use fats and proteins in addition 
to carbohydrates, the ratio becomes less than 1.0.    
 About 7% of the CO2 added to the blood is 
dissolved in plasma.  Another 16% is carried bound 
to hemoglobin.  It does not bind to the heme groups 
but rather to the globular protein "globin" groups.  
The combination is referred to as 
carbaminohemoglobin.  Even though oxygen and 
carbon dioxide are carried on different parts of the 
hemoglobin molecule, the binding of one displaces 
some of the other.  So in the tissues, the binding of 
carbon dioxide produced by the mitochondria helps 
to free the oxygen needed by the mitochondria.  In 
the lungs, binding of inspired oxygen helps free 
carbon dioxide to be exhaled as waste. 
 Most (about 77%) of the CO2 produced by 
the cells is transported back to the lungs in the form 
of bicarbonate ion due to the reaction of CO 2 with 
water.  The reaction is 
        CO2 + H2O  H2CO3   HCO3- + H+ 
The enzyme carbonic anhydrase facilitates this 
reaction. The enzyme is found in the erythrocytes.  
So, from the body tissues, the CO2 diffuses into the 
plasma and then into the erythrocytes.  Within the 
erythrocytes, the CO2 is first converted to carbonic 
acid (H2CO3) and then to bicarbonate ion (HCO 3-) 
and hydrogen ion (H +). The hydrogen ion then 
binds to hemoglobin to keep the cells from 
becoming acidic and the bicarbonate ion diffuses 
back into the plasma.  This keeps the concentration 
of hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions very low 
within the cytoplasm of the erythrocyte.  According 
to the law of mass action, the low concentration of 
product favors formation of more product. The 
above reaction is forced to the right.  To maintain 
the charge distribution, negatively charged chloride 
ions diffuse from the plasma into the ery throcytes 
to replace the negatively charged bicarbonate ions.  
 
 
 
When the blood reaches the lungs, these reactions 
quickly reverse, forming CO 2 again which is then 
passed to the alveoli.   
 The reaction demonstrates the correlation 
between CO 2 concentration and hydrogen ion 
concentration. The respiratory system can be used 
to help maintain normal hydrogen ion 
concentration. If hydrogen ion concentration 
becomes too high (a condition called acidosis), 
increasing ventilation will blow off CO 2 and less 
will be available to react with water to form 
hydrogen ions. If hydrogen ion concentration 
becomes too low (alkalosis), decreasing ventilation 
will allow CO2 to build up in the blood and it will 
react with water to form hydrogen ions. It also 
explains how respi ratory diseases that affect 
ventilation can lead to imbalances in hydrogen ions. 
Hypoventilation, for example, leads to acidosis.

===== PAGE 54 =====
50 
LESSON 17:  CONTROL OF VENTILATION  
 
Respiratory control involves adjusting 
ventilation so that the rate of gas exchange  in the 
lungs matches the rate of gas exchange in the 
tissues, maintaining normal steady -state arterial 
PO2 and PCO 2 values.  In addition, ventilation is 
adjusted to achieve adequate gas exchange using 
the minimum amount of work.   
WORK OF BREATHING 
 At re st, less than 5% of the oxygen 
consumed is used to meet the energy requirements 
of the respiratory system itself. During exercise, 
the oxygen requirement of the respiratory system 
can increase more than 50-fold.  In physical terms  
Work = Force × Distance 
or 
Work = Pressure × Volume 
 In the respiratory system, work (W) can be 
described graphically by plotting pleural pressure 
(P) with volume (V) as shown in the figure below.  
Pleural pressure can be measured by measuring 
pressure in a balloon passed into th e esophagus. 
The pressure in the esophagus is equal to the 
pressure in the pleural (chest) cavity. The slope of 
the curve is lung compliance (C), equal to about 
200 ml/cm H2O in an average adult.   
 
 
The area shaded in gray represents the 
work required to overcome the elastic and surface 
tension forces of the lung tissue.  This is called the 
compliance work or elastic work, W el.  The area 
below the compliance curve  (white) is the work 
required to overcome airway resistance (R). 
Resistance work is designated W R.   To calculate 
the total cost of breathing, work is multiplied by 
breathing frequency (f) to give W dotel and W dotR 
the rate of work.   From the graph you can see that  
From the above equations, note that the rate of 
elastic work changes exponentia lly with volume 
(V2 above) and linearly with frequency (f above). 
The work of breathing for persons with restrictive 
lung disease can therefore be minimized by 
choosing a breathing pattern with a low volume 
and high frequency. 
Compare with the rate for re sistance 
work:  
Resistance work changes exponentially in 
response to changes in rate of air flow  (V dot 2), 
and the greater the breathing frequency, the 
greater the flow rate that’s required.  That is due 
in part to the volume of dead space that remains 
relatively constant irrespective of tidal volume 
changes.  So doubling frequency would double 
flow to the dead space but increase dead space 
resistance work four-fold.   The work of breathing 
for persons with obstructive lung disease can 
therefore be minimize d by choosing a breathing 
pattern with a low frequency and high volume.

===== PAGE 55 =====
51 
In the figure above, note that both the 
resistance work and compliance work change 
exponentially in response to changes in breathing 
frequency and tidal volume.  
We breathe with a freq uency and a 
volume that minimizes the total work rate of 
breathing yet still provides the required alveolar 
ventilation.  The nervous system controls alveolar 
ventilation almost exactly to match the demands of 
the body.  The rate of oxygen diffusion across  the 
respiratory membrane is equal to the body's demand 
for oxygen (about 230 ml/min in the average adult, 
at rest).   
 Neural control of respiration is centered in 
the lower brain and brain stem.  This is the location 
of control mechanisms for all basic d rives that are 
vital to life including respiration, cardiac activity, 
thermoregulation, appetite and thirst and so on.  
Specifically, the "respiratory center" is found in the 
lowest part of the brain stem, the medulla 
oblongata.  Here an inspiratory center  generates 
"ramp" signals, gradually increasing inspiratory 
drive and gradually filling the lungs.  At rest, when 
the ramp signal terminates, the lungs empty 
passively.  During forceful breathing, a separate 
medullary expiratory center stimulate s active 
exhalation of gas from the lungs.  In the area above 
the medulla oblongata called the pons, there is a 
pneumotaxic center that controls the cut -off point 
for inspiration. Strong signals from the 
pneumotaxic center inhibit the inspiratory ramp and 
result in shallower but more rapid breathing. 
 Three stimuli that act to stimulate 
respiration are:  
1. Hypoxia, a fall in PO2 
2. Hypercapnia, an increase in PCO2 
3. Acidosis, a decrease in pH; increase in [H+] 
Below is the reflex arc for correcting hypoxia, 
hypercapnia or acidosis. 
CENTRAL CHEMORECEPTORS 
 The levels of hydrogen ion and P CO2 are 
sensed by central chemoreceptors located in close 
proximity to the respiratory centers themselves.  
These receptors are in contact with cerebral spinal 
fluid (CSF), not blood.  As CO 2 passes easily into 
the CSF, it is converted to HCO 3- and H + in a 
reaction described earlier.  The H + levels are then 
sensed by the receptors. The central 
chemoreceptors respond to very small changes in 
[H+] and P CO2, adjusting ventilation accordi ngly. 
Because equilibration between blood and CSF is 
required for central chemoreceptor stimulation, they 
do take longer to respond. 
 PERIPHERAL CHEMORECEPTORS 
 Oxygen levels are controlled by peripheral 
chemoreceptors.  The peripheral chemoreceptors 
are f ound in the carotid and aortic bodies.  The 
carotid bodies are small clusters of receptor cells 
located near the right and left common carotid 
arteries in the upper part of the neck.  The aortic 
bodies are similar cell clusters near the arch of the 
aorta just above the heart.  Sensory impulses from 
the carotid bodies are transmitted to the respiratory 
centers by fibers of the ninth pair of cranial nerves, 
the glossopharyngeal nerves.  The aortic bodies are 
innervated by the tenth pair of cranial nerves, the  
vagus nerves.  
 The peripheral chemoreceptors sense 
oxygen pressures in arterial blood directly.  P O2 
isn't controlled within as narrow limits as P CO2 is.  
That is, a small decrease in P O2 doesn’t result in a 
compensatory change in breathing pattern. The 
reason is related to differences in the way oxygen 
and carbon dioxide are carried in the blood.  The 
oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve is very flat 
when P O2 is above 70  to 80 mm Hg, as seen 
previously.  That is, changes in PO2 at these higher 
oxygen pressures in systemic arterial blood do not 
translate to significant changes in oxygen content 
of the blood. This is not true for CO 2.  Even small 
changes in P CO2 cause significant changes in the 
quantity of CO 2 that can be carried in the blood.  
The peripheral chemoreceptors don't exert much of 
an effect on breathing until arterial PO2 falls below 
70 mmHg. 
 While the peripheral chemoreceptors also 
respond to P CO2 and pH changes, the central 
chemoreceptors don’t allow levels of these

===== PAGE 56 =====
52 
molecules to change enough to reach the threshold 
of the peripheral receptors.  
Hyperpnea is defined as increased 
breathing to meet an increase in metabolic demand. 
By contrast , hyperventilation  is increased 
ventilation without a need.  In the latter, systemic 
arterial PCO2 levels fall significantly.  The most 
immediate effect is to constrict cerebral blood 
vessels. The victim feels lightheaded and may pass 
out. The fall in P CO2 can be countered by 
rebreathing CO2 (rebreathing from a paper bag, for 
example). Hypoventilation refers to an inadequate 
breathing pattern. As a result, PCO2 increases above 
normal ( hypercapnia) and PO2 may fall below 
normal (hypoxia). Obstructive and restrictive lung 
diseases are not the only causes of hypoventilation. 
Paralysis of respiratory muscles, chest  wall 
problems related to trauma or obesity, neurological 
damage, and anesthesia are other examples of 
possible causes.  
 It is important to note that it is the oxygen 
partial pressure (PO2) that is sensed and controlled, 
not oxygen content.  And P O2 values reflect only 
the dissolved oxygen.  Recall that even under 
normal conditions breathing air, less than 3% of the 
oxygen content is dissolved in plasma.  Cutting off 
ones air supply results in violent attempts to get air 
as PO 2 drops significantly . On the other hand, 
carbon monoxide poisoning, which affects only the 
ability to bind oxygen to hemoglobin but doesn't 
affect the oxygen dissolved in plasma (or P O2), is 
so dangerous because oxygen content falls to 
deadly levels without any stimulation of the 
nervous system to increase ventilation.  Arterial 
PO2 remains normal.  
Is the design of the control system flawed? 
 Without hemoglobin available, oxygen can only be 
carried dissolved in plasma. One would have to 
breathe pure oxygen at 3 atmospheres of pressure to 
dissolve sufficient oxygen in the plasma to meet 
resting metabolic needs. Increasing vent ilation 
would serve no purpose since the PO2 of pure air is 
only about 150 mmHg.   
OTHER RECEPTORS 
 Breathing is not controlled only by 
chemoreceptors.   Hold your breath as long as you 
can.  Then exhale into a paper sack and breathe in 
the exhaled gas. Clearly, the stimulus to the 
chemoreceptors that caused you to take a breath has 
not changed.  You inhaled the same air you 
exhaled. Yet you can hold your breath fo r a time 
before you have to take a second breath. Some 
other type of receptor must have been satisfied by 
taking the first breath.  
 Examples of mechanical receptors that may 
have been satisfied are the stretch receptors in the 
chest wall and lung.  Hering-Breuer receptors, as 
they’re called, are stretched as the lung inflates.  At 
a certain tension, they send impulses to the 
respiratory center to terminate the inflation, 
preventing the lungs from over-inflating. As stretch 
decreases to a certain point duri ng deflation, the 
receptors stimulate initiation of the next breath. It is 
activity in these  receptors that signal the 
respiratory centers that a breath has been taken 
and allows a pause to occur before the next breath.

===== PAGE 57 =====
53 
LESSON 18: ACID-BASE BALANCE  
 
The mechanisms that regulate acid -base 
concentrations represent another example of 
physiologic control to maintain homeostasis.  Acids 
are substances that ionize in water to produce 
hydrogen ions.  Bases act to remove them thus 
lowering hydrogen ion concentration.  
The normal concentration of hydrogen ions 
in blood is about 0.00000004 Eq/L.  Although 
small, the enzymatic reactions of physiological 
systems require a hydrogen ion concentration close 
to that value.  It is more convenient to express 
hydrogen ion concentration in pH units.  The pH is 
the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion 
concentration.  For example, a hydrogen ion 
concentration of 0.00000001 Eq/L could be 
expressed as 1.0 × 10-8 Eq/L, meaning that 
0.00000001 would become 1.0 if the decimal point 
was moved to the right by 8 places.  The logarithm 
of 10-8 is -8 and the negative logarithm is 8.  If pH 
is 7, that means the solution has 0.0000001 Eq/L of 
hydrogen ions or ten times more.  Each change of 1 
in pH represents a tenfold change in hydrog en ion 
concentration.   
The possible range for pH is 0 to 14. A pH 
of 7 represents the pH of pure water at room 
temperature and is considered neutral. Solutions 
with higher hydrogen ion concentration than water 
have a pH less than 7 and are acidic. Solutions with 
a lower concentration of hydrogen ions than water 
have a pH higher than 7 and are alkaline or basic. 
The normal hydrogen ion concentration of 
blood expressed in pH units is 7.4 with an 
acceptable range between 7.35 and 7.45. If pH 
falls outside thi s range, the biochemistry of the 
body is adversely affected. The most vulnerable is 
the central nervous system. The condition of too 
many hydrogen ions (lower than normal pH) is 
called acidosis and suppresses the nervous system 
leading ultimately to coma. The condition of too 
few hydrogen ions (higher than normal pH) is 
alkalosis that over -stimulates the nervous system 
leading to convulsions. 
A base is a compound that can neutralize 
an acid by binding up free hydrogen ions. An acid-
base buffer is a solution  of two or more 
compounds that prevents marked changes in 
hydrogen ion concentration when either an acid or 
base is added. The buffer system produces 
hydrogen ions when needed and removes them if 
they become excessive. The body has three 
important buffer s ystems to control pH: protein 
buffers in blood, the phosphate buffer system and 
the bicarbonate buffer system. 
The first line of defense is the protein 
system. Recall how erythrocytes, for example, are 
able to bind hydrogen ions on hemoglobin 
molecules. Many other negatively charged plasma 
proteins can also bind or release positively charged 
hydrogen ions to control free hydrogen ion 
concentration. 
The phosphate buffer system consists of 
phosphate ions HPO 4= and H 2PO4-.  If hydrogen 
ions are in excess, they  are combined with the 
divalent negatively charged ions forming the 
monovalent ion and removing a hydrogen ion (H+). 
If hydrogen ions become depleted, the reaction 
reverses.  
       HPO4= + H+    H2PO4-           (1) 
The phosphate buffer system is most 
important for acid -base balance in kidney tubules 
and inside body cells (cytoplasm pH). 
Outside of cells, the bicarbonate buffer 
system is more important. In the bicarbonate 
system, bicarbonate ion and carbonic acid act as the 
buffer pair. The advantage of t he bicarbonate 
system is that the concentration of the buffer pair 
can be controlled by both the lungs and kidneys. 
Acidosis means there are too many 
hydrogen ions. The kidneys respond by increasing 
the secretion of hydrogen ions and ammonia into 
the urine , and by increasing the reabsorption of 
sodium bicarbonate into the blood as summarized in 
the following chemical reactions. 
                   H+ + NH3     NH4+                   (2) 
where NH3 is ammonia and NH4+ is ammonium ion. 
Here, both hydrogen ion and ammonia are 
secreted into the urine.  By combining to form 
ammonium ions, they become trapped in the urine 
because ammonium ion cannot be reabsorbed back 
into the blood.

===== PAGE 58 =====
54 
Also in acidosis,  
                    H+ + HCO3-    H2CO3              (3) 
where H 2CO3 is carbonic acid and HCO 3- is 
bicarbonate ion. In this reaction the hydrogen ion is 
no longer free.  It has combined with bicarbonate 
ion and no longer contributes to the acidosis.  
Carbonic acid can be broken down to carbon 
dioxide and water.  The lungs help drive the 
reaction by increasing ventilation to get rid of the 
CO2 (product). 
                 H2CO3    CO2 + H2O                (4) 
 To correct alkalosis, secretion of hydrogen 
ion by the kidney is inhibited and less bicarbonate 
is reabsorbed.  In the lungs, ventilation decreases 
and carbon dioxide accumulates, reacts with water 
and produces hydrogen ions. 
     CO2 + H2O    H2CO3    HCO3- + H+   (5) 
 The law of mass action between reactant 
and product is at work determining which 
direction a reaction proceeds. Reactions move in a 
direction away from reactants in high 
concentration and toward reactants in low 
concentration. By controlling the levels of 
appropriate reactants, the body determines in 
which direction reactions will occur. 
ACID-BASE ABNORMALITIES 
 Deviations from normal pH are categorized 
as acidosis or alkalosis. Each can be of respiratory 
or metabolic origin. 
Hypoventilation due to pathologic 
conditions interfering with the ability to breathe 
(such as emphysema, asthma, nerve damage) leads 
to an accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood 
that reacts with water as in reaction (5) above to 
produce hydrogen ions. This is a respiratory 
acidosis. In respiratory acidosis, the systemic 
arterial blood PCO2 would be above the normal 40 
mm Hg. To deal with the excess in hydrogen ions, 
the kidney would raise blood levels of bicarbonate 
above the normal level of 24 mEq/L. 
During hyperventilation that might occur 
at high altitude, where oxygen in the atmosphere 
is "thinner", the situation is  reversed.  To get an 
equivalent amount of oxygen, ventilation is 
increased.  But because carbon dioxide production 
is the same as at low altitude, increased breathing 
lowers blood carbon dioxide below normal levels 
and reduces hydrogen ion concentration as in 
reactions (3) and (4) above. The result is a 
respiratory alkalosis .  In respiratory alkalosis, 
the systemic arterial blood PCO 2 would be below 
the normal 40 mm Hg. To deal with the loss of 
hydrogen ions, the kidney would lower blood 
levels of bicarbonate below the normal level of 24 
mEq/L. Lower bicarbonate means more hydrogen 
ions. 
 Compensation for imbalances of 
respiratory origin is accomplished by the blood and 
renal buffer mechanisms described above.   
Imbalances of non -respiratory origin are 
termed metabolic.  Here, the respiratory system can 
also participate in compensating for metabolic 
imbalances. 
 Acidosis of non-respiratory origin is termed 
metabolic acidosis.  An example is the acidosis of 
diabetes mellitus.  Keto-acids accumulate as a result 
of excessive fat metabolism needed to produce ATP 
by cells that can't absorb glucose because of a lack 
of insulin. In metabolic acidosis, the systemic 
arterial bicarbonate levels would be below the 
normal 24 mEq/L, being consumed by the excess 
numbers of hydrogen ions. To deal with the excess 
in hydrogen ions, the lungs would increase 
ventilation, blowing off more CO 2, lowering the 
blood PCO2 below the normal level of 40 mm Hg. 
This favors reactions (3) and (4) above. 
 Metabolic alkalosis  is alkalosis of  non-
respiratory origin.  An example would be alkalosis 
caused by loss of stomach acid that occurs during 
excessive vomiting. In metabolic alkalosis, the 
systemic arterial bicarbonate levels would be 
above the normal 24 mEq/L, there being fewer 
hydrogen io ns available to react with it. To deal 
with the reduction in hydrogen ions, the lungs 
would decrease ventilation, building up more CO 2 
in the blood, increasing the blood PCO 2 above the 
normal level of 40 mm Hg. This favors reaction 
(5) above. 
 Compensation of abnormalities by blood 
buffers is rapid, occurring in seconds.  
Compensation by the lungs occurs within minutes, 
providing the abnormality is not of respiratory 
origin.  Renal compensatory mechanisms take hours 
to develop.

===== PAGE 59 =====
55 
 
LESSON 19:  ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 
Communication and integration of 
activities within the body are controlled by two 
systems; the nervous system and endocrine 
system.  The nervous system transmits information 
electrically, rapidly and along specific pathways.  
The end ocrine system uses chemicals (hormones) 
that are distributed ubiquitously and more slowly 
(limited by the speed of the flowing blood).  
DESIGN OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Nerve cells that are able to conduct nerve 
impulses are called neurons.  There are about 1 00 
billion in the adult nervous system.  They generally 
have multiple dendrites that receive information 
from sensory receptors or other neurons, and 
transmit the information to effectors or other 
neurons through a single axon that may have 
multiple terminal branches enabling a neuron to 
stimulate many target cells at once.  A single 
neuron may receive input from several hundred to 
many thousands of other neurons.  Neurons can be 
divided into three groups - sensory neurons, motor 
neurons and interneurons.  
 Sensory neurons conduct impulses from 
receptors to the central nervous system (CNS). 
Sensory neurons are also called afferent (Latin: 
carry to) neurons. Receptors are of five basic types.  
Electromagnetic (photo) receptors sense light. 
Chemoreceptors respond to chemical stimulation. 
Thermoreceptors respond to temperature changes. 
Mechanoreceptors respond to mechanical events. 
Pain receptors respond only to painful stimuli. 
 Motor neurons transmit impulses from the 
CNS to effectors.   Since the impulses are being 
carried away from  the CNS, motor neurons are 
also called efferent (to carry away) neurons.  The 
effectors that carry out the "will" of the CNS are 
muscles and glands.  Skeletal muscles are 
controlled by somatic neurons, neurons of the 
voluntary nervous system.  Cardiac muscle, visceral 
muscle and certain glands are under the control of 
autonomic neurons, neurons of the involuntary 
nervous system.   
 Interneurons are neurons that are found 
"between" sensory and motor neurons or other 
interneurons in th e CNS.  Sensory information is 
handled in different ways by the interneurons. 
Probably about 99% of the sensory impulses are 
filtered out (ignored) as they make their way 
through interneuron pathways. That includes 
information from external receptors - the five 
senses.  If the nervous system had to respond to all 
stimuli, it would be completely overwhelmed. So 
most of what you are able to sense never reaches 
your normal level of consciousness.   
 Some sensory information is directly 
transmitted to motor neurons to elicit an immediate 
response.  Pulling away a finger on touching a hot 
stove or increasing heart rate in response to a fall in 
blood pressure are examples.  When a stimulus 
elicits an immediate response, the behavior is called 
a reflex response.   
 Some sensory information is stored in 
memory to be acted upon at some later time (or 
perhaps never to be used). The hallmark of the 
human brain is its ability to not only store 
information, but to combine bits of information 
gathered at different times and  from various 
receptors to produce a "reasoned" output at the 
appropriate time. 
THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 The most "primitive" level of nervous 
system control is at the level of the spinal cord.  
Many reflexes involving skeletal muscles will occur 
even if the cord is severed from the brain.  Tapping 
the knee will elicit the reflex kicking of the lower 
leg; the knee-jerk reflex.  The reflex may disappear 
following spinal transection, but within a few 
weeks, it returns.  Reflex tests like the knee jerk are 
routinely used to assess the integrity of the spinal 
cord.  Some autonomic reflexes are rooted in the 
spinal cord. 
 The next level of control is exerted by the 
brain stem and cerebellum.  Autonomic activities 
controlled subconsciously are centered here.  T he 
brain stem controls activities that are basic to life.  
Cardiovascular and respiratory reflexes already 
discussed, are centered here.  Thirst, appetite, 
control of body temperature, sexual cycles, centers 
invoking aggression and submission are all found in 
the brain stem.  The cerebellum coordinates skeletal 
muscle activity, specifying which muscles must 
contract and which relax and by how much, to 
coordinate complex movements.

===== PAGE 60 =====
56 
 
 The cerebral cortex of the cerebrum is 
the highest level and is best developed in the human 
brain. It is the cortex that stores information 
(memory) and acts on it when and if it needs to, 
giving rise to thought processes that allow us to 
reason and solve problems.  The cortex and lower 
brain centers work together. The brain stem 
activates the cortex or can deactivate it (as in a 
coma).  The cortex, in turn, makes the crude control 
mechanisms of the brain stem work with much 
greater precision. 
SYNAPSES 
 One of the key features of the nervous 
system is its ability to evaluate sensory information 
and determine how it should respond, if at all.  
Neurons fire in all or none fashion.  There are no 
weak or strong action potentials.  The ability to 
"grade" information is unique to the synapse.  It is 
there that all -or-none information from  as few as 
several hundred or as many as 100,000 separate 
presynaptic neurons is combined in an attempt to 
make a single postsynaptic neuron fire.    
 We will consider the most common type of 
nervous system synapse; the chemical synapse that 
uses small mo lecule, rapid acting chemical 
transmitter substances.  (There are electrical 
synapses such as those between adjacent cardiac 
muscle cells (intercalated disks) and smooth muscle 
cells. There are also large molecule, slow acting 
transmitters in the CNS but t hey behave more like 
hormones and will be discussed later.   Some of the 
two dozen or so small molecule transmitters act to 
cause action potentials in the postsynaptic cell. 
Others act to inhibit action potential generation.   
 A good example of a small mo lecule rapid 
acting transmitter is acetylcholine.  It is synthesized 
in the synaptic vesicles within the axon terminus.   
Depolarization of the axon causes calcium ions to 
pass into the axon tip from the interstitial fluid.  
Through some poorly understood process, the 
calcium ions enable vesicles to fuse with the cell 
membrane of the presynaptic axon at the synapse 
and release the acetylcholine by exocytosis.  The 
transmitter binds to appropriate receptors on the 
postsynaptic membrane, but is rapidly metabolized 
by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase that is 
produced by the postsynaptic cell.  The choline can 
be transported back into the axon vesicles and 
reconverted to acetylcholine.  The vesicles can 
detach from the cell membrane and be used again.  
The whole process described above occurs in a 
millisecond time frame, allowing neurons that use 
this type of transmitter to fire at very high 
frequencies. 
 To understand how transmitter substances 
are able to stimulate postsynaptic cells, we need to 
recall the normal resting electrochemical gradients 
in excitable tissues.  Sodium ions are distributed 
mainly in the interstitial fluid outside the cell while 
potassium ion is in highest concentration inside the 
cell.  These two ions are the ones most involved in 
the decision making process at the synapse.  Due to 
the abundance of negatively charged proteins 
trapped inside the cell, the inside of the cell is 
electrically more negative in charge than the outside 
so an electrochemical gradient exists.  
 To generate an action  potential, the 
membrane must allow positive charges to enter, 
causing it to depolarize (reverse its polarity).  
When the membrane is suddenly made permeable 
to sodium ions, they flood into the cell, drawn in 
down both the electrical and chemical gradients .  
The inside becomes more positive and that has an 
excitatory effect. Excitatory chemical transmitters 
generate action potentials by binding to receptors 
on ligand gated sodium channels, allowing sodium 
ion to diffuse freely into the cell.  Acetylcholine 
and norepinephrine are examples of excitatory 
transmitters. 
 If the membrane became more permeable 
to potassium ion or chloride ion, which direction 
would the ions move?  The chemical gradient 
favors movement of potassium ion to the outside 
and chloride io n to the inside.  The electrical 
gradient favors movement in the opposite direction. 
   Applying the Nernst equation (studied 
earlier) to these two ions, one can determine that 
the ions would in fact move down their chemical

===== PAGE 61 =====
57 
 
gradients.  Potassium ion would  carry its positive 
charge out of the cell and chloride ion would carry 
its negative charge into the cell.  Both processes 
would make the inside of the cell more negative.  
This would act to inhibit the generation of an action 
potential.  When the inside of a cell becomes more 
negative than normal, the cell is said to be 
hyperpolarized.  Inhibitory transmitter substances 
bind to potassium ion or chloride ion ligand gated 
channels, making the membrane more permeable to 
the respective ion, and therefore more difficult to 
stimulate.  Glycine and gamma-amino butyric acid 
(GABA) are examples of inhibitory transmitters. 
 So how is the synaptic "decision" made?  
Recall that from hundreds to tens of thousands of 
presynaptic neurons are synapsing with the single 
postsynaptic cell.  About 80% synapse with the 
postsynaptic cell ’s dendrites and 20% with the 
cell’s soma (body). A single presynaptic excitatory 
neuron couldn't generate an action potential.  A 
minimum of 100 or so different excitatory neurons 
have to fire simultaneously to excite the cell.  This 
is called spatial summation.  Some excitatory cells 
may fire at high frequency, making them more 
effective in exciting a cell.  This is called temporal 
summation.  Meanwhile, inhibitory presynaptic 
cells may be stimu lated and, exhibiting spatial or 
temporal summation, oppose the effect of the 
excitatory cells.  So if the action potential is to be 
generated, more excitatory cells will be needed. 
 The average CNS neuron has a resting 
potential of about -65 millivolts. T his is less 
negative than the -90 millivolt potential of muscle 
cells and peripheral neurons discussed earlier.  The 
reason for the difference is to provide the CNS with 
the option of inhibiting nerve activity using 
hyperpolarization; that is, bringing the  membrane 
potential below the normal resting potential, 
therefore making it more difficult to reach 
threshold.  Recall, the lower limit for membrane 
potentials based on the Nernst equation for 
potassium ion is about -94 millivolts. So 
hyperpolarization wouldn’t be possible if that was 
the normal resting membrane potential.   
 When a single presynaptic axon changes 
the membrane potential at the synapse, that change 
is conducted throughout the cell. This is why spatial 
summation is possible. The excitatory pr esynaptic 
cells together must increase the potential above a 
certain threshold to initiate an action potential.  The 
threshold for most cells is about -45 millivolts.  
When the threshold is reached, the ligand gated 
sodium channels will suddenly open and t he cell 
will depolarize.  Most of these sodium channels are 
located at the axon hillock, so most action 
potentials will begin at the hillock and not at a 
particular synapse.  Again, this is because the 
change in potential at a given synapse is conducted 
throughout the neuron cytoplasm. 
 Potential changes that make the inside less 
negative are called excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials (EPSP's).  Those that make the potential 
more negative (for example a drop from -65 
millivolts to -70 millivolts) are called inhibitory 
postsynaptic potentials (IPSP’s). 
 Inhibition using IPSP's is called 
postsynaptic inhibition.  It occurs rapidly and for 
short duration.  There is another type of inhibition 
called presynaptic inhibition .  In this case, 
inhibitory neurons act by decreasing the amount of 
excitatory transmitter released by the presynaptic 
neuron.  They do so by making the presynaptic 
neuron less permeable to calcium ions.  Remember 
calcium ions are necessary for fusion of vesicles 
with the synaptic membrane.  Presynaptic inhibition 
occurs more slowly but can be sustained for long 
periods of time. 
 Many factors affect the excitability of 
neurons.  Alkalosis increases excitability while 
acidosis decreases excitability.  Drugs such as 
caffeine increase excitability whi le anesthetics 
decrease excitability.  Lack of oxygen due to loss of 
cerebral blood flow can lead to unconsciousness in 
just seconds.

===== PAGE 62 =====
58 
 
LESSON 20:  SPECIAL SENSES: VISION    
 
The receptors of the eye are photo 
receptors that respond to stimulation by l ight. 
However, most eye structures are not involved with 
responding to light  stimuli but rather in 
conditioning the light stimuli before they are 
sensed. 
The outer portion of the eye is composed of 
three tissue layers, the outer sclera, the middle 
choroid and the inner retina.  The outer protective 
layer is the white fibrous sclera.  Anteriorly, the 
sclera becomes the translucent cornea.   
 The middle layer is the choroid, black in 
color because it absorbs light of all visible 
wavelengths. Light that has a lready stimulated the 
receptor cells is absorbed allowing the image on the 
retina to continuously “refresh”.   Anteriorly, the 
choroid forms the iris and ciliary body, structures 
that surround the lens of the eye.  The iris and 
ciliary body are intrinsic (internal) eye muscles.  
The ciliary body is attached to the edges of the lens 
by suspensory ligaments.  The iris extends down 
in front of the lens. The choroid is not a complete 
layer.  A hole in the center of the iris, called the 
pupil, allows light to enter the eye.  The choroid is 
a very vascular layer providing blood to the inner 
layer of receptor cells.  The inner tissue layer is 
called the retina.  This layer contains the actual 
photoreceptor cells of two types, rods and cones, 
covered by layers of con ducting nerve cells 
described below.  The retina is an incomplete layer, 
covering only the back two-thirds of the eyeball.   
ACCOMMODATION 
 As parallel rays of light from distant 
sources pass through the biconvex lens of the eye, 
they are refracted or bent  such that the rays will 
converge with their focal point falling on the fovea 
centralis of the 
retina.  A convex 
lens that is able to 
focus parallel light 
one meter beyond 
it, has a refractive 
power of 1 diopter. 
 The retina of the 
eye is only about 
17 millimeters from 
the lens.  The refractive power of the lens is 
therefore 59 diopters for parallel rays of light from 
distant sources.  But light rays originating close to 
the eyes are diverging as they reach the lens.  If the 
lens were unable to increase its  refractive power, 
the focal point would fall behind the retina.  The 
image hitting the retina would be blurred.  The 
ability to correct this problem is referred to as  
accommodation. Increasing the refractive power 
requires a convex lens with greater curva ture.  To 
focus distant objects, the muscles of the ciliary 
body are relaxed and the diameter of the ciliary 
body is maximal.  This puts tension on the 
suspensory ligaments, causing the lens to flatten. 
For near vision, the ciliary muscles contract, 
decreasing the diameter of the ciliary body and 
relaxing the suspensory ligaments.  This allows the 
lens to bulge, increasing the refractive power 
appropriately.   
 Emmetropia refers to the ability to 
accommodate correctly.  In hyperopia or far -

===== PAGE 63 =====
59 
 
sightedness, the  eyeball is too short and the 
refractive power has to be increased by the ciliary 
muscles, even for distant objects.   Even maximal 
contraction fails to converge light from near objects 
sufficiently. Glasses with biconvex lenses are 
required to increases the convergence of light rays 
before they enter the lens.   
 In myopia or near-sightedness, the eyeball 
is too elongated and the focal point for distant 
objects falls in front of the lens.  Since the lens 
lacks the ability to cause light to diverge, distant  
objects appear blurred.  Glasses with biconcave 
lenses are required to diverge the light rays before 
they enter the eye.  As one ages, the ability to 
accommodate is lost.  This is called presbyopia.  
Bifocal lenses are then required to correct for both 
near and far vision. 
 Cataract is a condition of the lens that 
often occurs as part of the aging process. The lens 
becomes cloudy, opaque and distorted causing 
blurred vision and possible blindness. It can be 
corrected by removing the lens and replacing it with 
an artificial implant.  
 The other intrinsic eye muscle associated 
with the choroid layer is the iris.  The radial and 
circular muscles of the iris regulate the size of the 
center opening called the pupil.  Contraction of 
radial fibers increases the size of the pupil allowing 
more light to pass onto the retina.  Contraction of 
the circular fibers decreases the size of the pupil 
reducing the amount of light entering the eye.  
GLAUCOMA 
 The anterior cavity of the eye (in front of 
the lens) is filled with aqueous humor, a watery 
nutrient solution that nourishes the outer lens and 
inner corneal surfaces.  Aqueous humor is produced 
continuously by the ciliary body, enters the anterior 
cavity between the lens and iris, flows centrally 
from behind the iris, then through the pupil, finally 
moving peripherally in front to the iris toward the 
scleral venous sinus (canal of Schlemm) near the 
edges of the cornea where it is returned to the 
venous circulation.  The fluid pressure of aqueous 
humor is about 15 mmHg.  If  aqueous humor is 
produced faster than it is reabsorbed, it accumulates 
in the anterior cavity, increasing the intraocular 
pressure.  This condition is called glaucoma.  The 
increase in pressure is reflected into the posterior 
cavity (behind the lens), fil led with a more 
gelatinous substance called vitreous humor .  
Unlike aqueous  humor, it is not produced 
continuously. The fairly non-compressible vitreous 
humor is pushed against the posterior of the eye, 
squeezing blood vessels and compromising blood 
flow to the receptor cells.  Receptor cells starved of 
nutrient may die, causing permanent blindness. 
THE RETINA 
 The light-sensitive photo-receptors are the 
rods and cones.  They are in the inner-most layer of 
cells, the retina, lying just in front of the choro id 
layer.  The elongated cells consist of an outer 
segment containing a pigment that reacts 
chemically when stimulated by light rays.  The 
pigment molecules impregnate stacks of 
membranes that form the outer segment.  In cones, 
the membranes taper toward t he tip of the cell, in 
rods they don't.  About 40% of the outer segment is 
visual pigment.  In rods, the visual pigment is 
retinal combined with a protein called scotopsin.  
The combination is called rhodopsin.  When the 
rhodopsin molecules are stimulated by light, they 
undergo a step-wise degradation back to retinal and 
scotopsin.  This chemical decomposition occurring 
in the cell membrane stimulates the receptor cell. 
 Unlike other neurons, nerve cells of the 
retina conduct impulses by hyperpolarization 
rather than depolarization.   The outer segment of 
the receptor cells is more permeable to sodium ion 
than the typical neuron. Therefore, the resting 
membrane potential is a less negative than the 
typical neuron.  The breakdown of rhodopsin makes 
the membra ne less permeable to sodium ion, 
making the inside of the cell more negative rather 
than less negative.  This is hyperpolarization.  The 
advantage is that this hyperpolarization mechanism 
can be graded corresponding to stimulus intensity 
whereas the action  potential resulting from 
depolarization is all or none.  Rods are adapted for 
seeing in dim light, but can't see in color. In 
addition, rods do not provide good visual acuity. 
 Cones also contain the visual pigment 
retinal, but the protein scotopsin is re placed by 
proteins that react with specific wavelengths of 
light.  Some cones respond to shorter wavelength 
blue light, some to intermediate wavelength green 
and some to longer wavelength red.  Intermediate 
colors result from partial stimulation of differe nt 
cone populations that the brain can interpret as

===== PAGE 64 =====
60 
 
colors resulting from a mixture of red, blue or 
green. The concept is illustrated in the figure below. 
Partial or differential stimulation is possible 
because of hyperpolarization. Looking at the 500 
nanometer point on the graph below, if the blue and 
red cones are hyperpolarized at 25% maximum and 
green cones at 75% maximum, the brain perceives a 
color having a 500 nanometer wavelength. In 
addition to seeing in color, cones provide greater 
visual acuity. To accomplish this, however, they 
require a significant amount of light. Cones do not 
do well in dim light.    
 Rods and cones are able to adapt to 
different light intensities by converting between the 
active pigment retinal and the inactive form called 
retinol, also called vitamin A .  In bright light, 
over-stimulation of rods would produce a 
continuous bright flash against the retina, 
overwhelming the receptors.  To prevent this, 
significant amounts of retinal are inactivated by 
conversion to retinol.  The eye has undergone light 
adaptation.  Now suppose you enter a dark movie 
theater from bright sunlight.  At first, the room is 
totally dark and you are unable to determine where 
the empty seats are located.  Within a very short 
time, the eyes undergo dark adaptation.   Stored 
retinol is converted back to retinal and rhodopsin is 
formed.  Soon you can see exactly where everyone 
is seated.   
 As you leave the theater and enter bright 
sunlight, your eyes are over-stimulated to the point 
that even with constric ted pupils it is necessary to 
squint or close your eyes because of the brightness. 
 Soon sufficient retinal is deactivated by conversion 
to retinol, and your eyes are light adapted again.  
Adaptation makes it possible to see from extremes 
of dim starlight to bright sunlight, a range in 
intensity of about 10 billion-fold. 
 Overlying the rods and cones are layers of 
other neuronal cells including bipolar and ganglion 
cells.  The ganglion cells are the ones that 
ultimately transmit action potentials to the bra in.  
The intermediate cells make it possible to 
precondition the stimuli before they are passed to 
the brain.  Interconnections through stimulatory and 
inhibitory synapses make it possible to amplify the 
stimulus.  On average, a single ganglion cell 
receives stimuli from 60 rods or 2 cones.  This 
pattern of innervation explains why rods are better 
suited for dim light but have poor er visual acuity 
compared to cones . In dim light, an individual 
ganglion cell has as many as 60 rods “searching” 
for a light impulse. However, when stimulated, the 
ganglion cell can’t determine which rod was 
responsible. It’s like painting with a broad brush. 
The picture lacks detail.  
 If a ganglion cell is stimulated by a cone, it 
can pinpoint the source because there are only on e 
or two cones that could be responsible. A detailed 
picture emerges. However, in dim light there is little 
chance that a sufficient number of individual cones 
will be stimulated  in order to project a detailed 
image. 
 Intermediate cells also enable the eye  to 
detect changes in the visual field (detect 
movement), enhance edges for greater visual acuity 
and perceive color.  Light must pass through these 
inner layers of cells to reach the rods and cones 
except in the fovea centralis.  This area, less than a 
square millimeter, contains only cones with no 
overlaying cells and is the area of greatest visual 
acuity. The focal point, referred to in the discussion 
of accommodation, is the fovea centralis. It is 
marked with a yellow spot called the macula lutea.  
 Macular degeneration , an age -related 
condition, is an impairment of this most sensitive 
part of the retina. It is associated with blurred 
central vision and gradual loss of vision beginning 
centrally.  A detached retina , due to injury or 
irregularity of protein fibers attaching the retina to 
the pigment layer below, can survive for up to 
several days. However, if not repaired surgically, it 
will become permanently damaged.

===== PAGE 65 =====
61 
 
CENTRAL PROCESSING OF VISION 
 An optic nerve is attached to the back of 
each eye. The n erve is sensory only, carrying 
afferent impulses for the receptor cells of the eye. 
At the point where the optic nerve is attached, there 
are no overlying rods or cones. This location on the 
retina is called the optic disk or blind spot.  
 At the base of the brain, optic nerve fibers 
innervating the medial half of each retina crossover. 
This is called the optic chiasma.  From the optic 
chiasma, optic tracts lead to the visual cortex of 
the brain, located in the posterior part of the 
cerebral cortex.  Damag e to an optic nerve affects 
vision to the eye that the nerve innervates.  Damage 
to an optic tract affects vision in the lateral half of 
one eye and the medial half of the other eye.   
 The partial crossover of the optic nerves 
makes sense when one conside rs how images are 
projected onto the retina. From the above figure, 
one can imagine an object positioned to the left of 
the eyes, for example, and note that the image 
would fall on the right side in both retinas and be 
sensed by the right cerebral cortex.  Some believe 
that this may explain why it would be most 
practical for the right side of the cerebral cortex to 
control the muscles on the left side of the body. 
 Visual impulses are carried to the primitive 
visual system in the brain stem.  While the brai n 
stem structures are not able to provide conscious 
vision, they do control some of the subconscious 
reflexes associated with vision such as reflex eye 
movements associated with head movement,  
avoidance reflexes and other tracking reflexes.  For 
example, the eyes can remain focused on an object 
even if the head is moving.  As the head moves to 
the left, the eyes move to the right.           From the 
brain stem structures, impulses are conducted to the 
primary visual areas in the occipital (posterior) 
lobes of the cerebral cortex of the cerebrum. It is 
there that the impulses are translated to conscious 
visual images and then passed to surrounding 
association areas of the cortex for interpretation.  It 
is in the association areas that a face is associated 
with a person, that scenery is associated with a 
particular location. 
EXTERNAL EYE MUSCLES  
 Eye movements are provided by extrinsic 
voluntary skeletal muscles, six for each eye, that 
move the eyeball within its socket.  These muscles 
make it possible to cha nge the visual field by 
changing eyeball position without having to move 
the head. The muscles move the eyes so that the 
light rays brought to a focal point by the lens, fall 
directly on the fovea centralis, the area of greatest 
visual acuity. 
DEPTH (DISTANCE) PERCEPTION 
 We can judge depth or distance in three 
ways.  First, if we are familiar with the size of an 
object, we can judge its distance based on the size 
of the image on the retina.  Secondly, we judge 
distance by the phenomenon of moving parallax.  
Even if a close object moves only slightly, it will 
still sweep across a large portion of the retina.  If a 
distant object moves the same amount, its image on 
the retina will hardly move at all.  By evaluating the 
perceived movement, we can judge distanc e.  The 
third mechanism is by stereopsis- binocular vision. 
Because the eyes are over two inches apart, they 
don’t “see” the same images.  The closer the object, 
the more different the image.  Interpretation of the 
magnitude of the difference enables us to  interpret 
distance.  Stereopsis works best for near objects.

===== PAGE 66 =====
62 
 
LESSON 21:  HEARING, TASTE AND SMELL
 
THE EXTERNAL AND MIDDLE EAR 
 Sound begins as vibrations of air collected 
by the external ear flap (auricle), channeled down 
the ear canal (external audi tory meatus) to the 
tympanic membrane, commonly called the eardrum. 
The external ear conducts sound vibrations using 
air as the medium.   
 The chamber on the inner side of the 
tympanic membrane is the middle ear.  Three small 
bones in each ear, referred to as ossicles, conduct 
sound waves through the middle ear.  Thus, in the 
middle ear, sound is conducted as vibration of solid 
bone.  The handle of the first ossicle (called the 
malleus) is seated against t he inner side of the 
tympanic membrane.  The opposit e end of the 
malleus is connected to the second ossicle called 
the incus, which in turn connects to the last ossicle, 
the stapes.  The lever arrangement and structure of 
the ossicles acts to intensify the force of the 
vibrations.  This is necessary because  the receptor 
cells in the inner ear are in a liquid environment (a 
requirement for living cells).  Since liquid has more 
inertia than air, conduction from air to liquid 
requires more force.  The force of the stapes against 
the oval window (the opening to the inner ear) is 
more than 20 times greater than the force generated 
at the tympanic membrane.   
 Muscles attached to the ossicles are able to 
reduce the force of sound vibrations.  These 
muscles contract reflex ively in response to loud 
noises.  This hel ps to protect the delicate inner ear 
structure from excessively forceful vibrations. 
 For the tympanic membrane to vibrate 
optimally, the pressure on both sides must be equal. 
 A narrow tube called the auditory (Eustachian) 
tube runs from the middle ear to  the pharynx 
(throat) at the back of the nasal passages.  This tube 
allows the middle ear to equilibrate with 
atmospheric pressure.  
THE INNER EAR 
 The inner ear contains receptors for both 
hearing and balance.  The receptors for balance will 
be covered later.  The inner ear structure containing 
the receptors for hearing is called the cochlea.  The 
cochlea and the other inner ear structures are 
embedded in the temporal bones of the skull.  The 
temporal bones form the central portion of the sides 
and floor o f the cranial cavity.  When the stapes 
pushes inward against the oval window, the fluids 
in the cochlea are not compressed, however.  This 
is because there is another opening between the 
cochlea and middle ear called the round window.  
When the oval window  is pushed inward, the 
membrane over the round window is pushed 
outward (and visa versa). 
 The cochlea is essentially three parallel 
tubular chambers coiled up like a snail.  The oval 
window opens into the upper chamber called the 
scala vestibuli. A thin membrane called Reissner’s 
 membrane separates the scala vestibuli from the 
middle chamber, the scala media (also called the 
cochlear duct).  A much thicker membrane called 
the basilar membrane separates the scala media 
from the lower channel called the scala tympani.  
The scala tympani and scala vestibuli are filled with 
a fluid called perilymph, a fluid derived from, and 
very similar to, cerebral spinal fluid, the fluid found 
in and around the brain and spinal cord. The scala 
media contains endolymph produced in the scala 
media itself. Endolymph is unique in that it contains 
high concentrations of potassium ions.  It is thought 
that the high potassium environment helps to 
increase the sensitivity of the receptors for hearing. 
 Reissner’s membrane serves onl y to 
separate the perilymph from the endolymph and 
offers no barrier for sound wave conduction.  The 
basilar membrane is directly involved in sound 
wave conduction. Fibrous rods, attached only at one 
end, extend through the tissue of the basilar 
membrane from one side to the other.  At the base 
of the cochlea, near the oval window, the fibers are

===== PAGE 67 =====
63 
 
short and thick.  Moving toward the tip of the 
cochlea, they gradually become longer and thinner. 
The resonant frequency of the membrane thus 
becomes lower as one moves from base to tip.  
While the sound vibrations at a given pitch are 
conducted through the endolymph all along the 
scala media, only the segment of basilar membrane 
with the same frequency will begin to vibrate. Each 
frequency therefore stimulates a group of receptors 
at a different place (place principle) on the basilar 
membrane, enabling the brain to sense different 
pitches of sound. 
 The receptors for hearing are found on the 
basilar membrane in the scala media.  The receptor 
is called the organ of Corti.  The receptor is a 
mechanoreceptor consisting of an array of hair 
cells below a membrane called the tectorial 
membrane.  Small bristles called cilia project 
upward from the hair cells into a gel that coats the 
inner surface of the tectorial membrane .  As the 
basilar membrane vibrates up and down, the 
movement causes the hair cells to rub back and 
forth against the tectorial membrane. The 
mechanical movement stimulates the cells 
producing an action potential.   
 Loudness is translated as sound wave 
amplitude.  Higher amplitudes cause receptor cells 
to fire with greater frequency (temporal 
summation), cause surrounding receptor cells to fire 
(spatial summation), and cause more receptors to 
reach threshold.  The brain interprets the more 
intense stimulation as louder sound. 
CENTRAL PATHWAYS 
 Nerve impulses from the cochlea pass to 
the brain through the eighth pair of cranial nerves.  
They project upward through the brain stem to the 
superior part of the temporal lobe  of the cerebral 
cortex found under the  temporal bone. There is 
partial crossover of pathways so each side of the 
brain receives impulses from both ears.  Auditory 
impulses also pass to the reticular formation of the 
brain stem.  This formation regulates the body's 
"state of wakefulness". Sudden loud noises send a 
"shockwave" of stimulation through the entire brain 
by way of the reticular formation, bringing the brain 
to full alert. 
 Surrounding the primary auditory cortex is 
an association area. (This is similar to the 
arrangement in the visual  cortex of the occipital 
lobe.)  The association area is necessary for sound 
interpretation.  Without it, for example, you could 
still hear words and even repeat them, but you 
wouldn't be able to give them any meaning. 
DEAFNESS 
 Deafness is of two types - nerve deafness 
and conduction deafness.  In nerve deafness , 
neither vibrations transmitted through the external 
and middle ear, nor vibrations conducted directly 
through the bones of the skull are perceived.  
Amplification devices are ineffective.   
 In conduction deafness , transmission of 
sound vibrations from the external ear to the inner 
ear is impeded. The problem could be caused by a 
damaged tympanic membrane, fusion of the 
ossicles, accumulation of earwax, plugg ed 
Eustachian tubes or other blockages. In conduction 
deafness, sound vibrations transmitted through the 
external and middle ear are diminished, but sound 
produced by vibrating a tuning fork against the 
skull is normal.  Amplification devices can usually 
correct conduction deafness, at least partially. 
CHEMICAL SENSES OF TASTE AND SMELL 
 Taste receptors called the taste buds  
consist of groups of about 40 cells each embedded 
in the epithelial tissue of the tongue.  A small 
cluster of hair -like structures called microvilli 
extend from each taste bud  onto the surface of the 
tongue.  Molecules of substances entering the 
mouth bind to proteins in the membranes of the 
microvilli, causing them to depolarize.  The taste 
buds are therefore examples of chemoreceptors.   
 Although taste buds generally respond  to 
many different chemicals, most have a preference 
for a particular taste.  Receptors have been 
categorized into five main types: salty, sweet, sour, 
bitter and umami. Unami (“pleasant”) is most 
apparent in foods containing glutamate.  We can, 
however, distinguish between hundreds of tastes, so

===== PAGE 68 =====
64 
 
each taste must result from simultaneous 
differential stimulation of all types of taste buds by 
a given chemical.  This is analogous to our ability 
to distinguish hundreds of shades of colors using 
just three types of cones.   
 Taste not only serves to attract us to food 
necessary for survival, but probably to specific 
foods required for proper nutrition.  For example, 
salt depleted subjects choose salty food, 
hypoglycemic subjects preferentially select sweet 
food.  Taste is also protective.  The most sensitive 
receptors are the bitter taste buds.  Plant poisons are 
composed of bitter alkaloid molecules and 
perception of the unpleasant bitter taste helps us to 
avoid eating them. 
 Odor is detected by single olfactory 
receptor cells embedded in the mucosa in the upper 
part of the nasal passages.  Tufts of cilia protrude 
into the mucous layer covering the nasal passages 
and odorant molecules bind to proteins in these 
tufts, causing the cells to depolarize.  Thus, only 
volatile chemicals that can be sniffed into the nose 
and only chemicals that can dissolve in mucus can 
be smelled.  The olfactory receptors are another 
example of chemoreceptors. 
MECHANICAL TACTILE SENSATION 
 Touch receptors are mechanoreceptors of 
the skin.  There are basically three types.  The first 
are receptors near the surface of the skin that 
respond to light touch. They are particularly 
abundant on the fingertips and lips that are able to 
discern spatial characteristics of objects.  Then 
there are deep er receptors in the skin that sense 
deep, continuous pressure.  Finally there are rapidly 
adapting receptors specially designed to sense 
vibration.  
THERMORECEPTORS 
 Temperature is sensed by separate 
populations of warmth and cold receptors found 
directly below the skin. Cold receptors outnumber 
warmth receptors by as much as ten to one. 
Extremes of temperature also activate pain 
receptors. It is thought that cold and warmth 
receptors are stimulated by changes in their 
metabolic rates. These changes result from the fact 
that temperature changes the rate of chemical 
reactions occurring inside cells. Rate 
approximately double s for every 10°C change in 
temperature. Thermoreceptors respond quickly  
and sense steady -state temperatures without 
adapting. They respon d very intensely to changes 
in temperature, rapidly adapting to the change - as 
in the initial thermal shock when jumping into a 
cool lake  that quickly adjusts to a perception of 
the actual temperature of the water.  
PAIN RECEPTORS 
 The pain receptors in th e skin and other 
tissues are all bare nerve endings. Three types of 
stimuli excite them - mechanical, thermal and 
chemical. Pain receptors sensitive to chemicals are 
stimulated by chemicals released from damaged 
tissue and are responsible for the slow, suff ering 
type of pain following tissue injury. 
 Common causes of pain include tissue 
ischemia and muscle spasm. Loss of blood flow to 
a tissue causes oxygen starvation (ischemia). The 
pain is thought to be due to accumulation of lactic 
acid in the tissues, a condition that results from 
excessive anaerobic glucose metabolism.  The 
onset of pain is directly related to the oxygen 
demand. Blocking flow to exercising muscle 
causes pain within half a minute. In resting 
muscle, loss of oxygen may not result in pain f or 
several minutes. Muscle spasms cause pain by 
direct compression of mechanical pain receptors, 
but the ischemia that results from the spasm also 
contributes to the pain. Oxygen demand actually 
increases during spasm. 
 Headache is the result of pain refer red to 
the surface of the head from deep structures. It 
may be of intracranial or extracranial origin. 
Examples of intracranial headaches include 
headaches caused by inflammation (e.g. 
meningitis), low cerebral spinal fluid pressure, 
alcohol and vascular c hanges. Migraine headache 
is a type of vascular headache. It is thought the 
migraine is initiated by vasospasm of cerebral 
vessels that produces a visual aura and other 
symptoms associated with the onset. For some 
reason, the vascular smooth muscle eventua lly 
loses tone and the vessels dilate. That begins the 
pain. It may be that the pain is caused by 
stretching of pain receptors in the wall of the 
dilated vessels.  
 Common causes of extracranial headache 
include spasm of skeletal muscles of the head, 
sinus headaches and headaches caused by eye 
disorders.

===== PAGE 69 =====
65 
 
LESSON 22:  SENSORY PATHWAYS 
 
The sensory pathways we will consider 
involve both the brain and spinal cord.    
THE SPINAL CORD 
 The spinal cord runs through the vertebral 
foramen (= hole) of  the vertebral column.  The 
organization of the spinal cord is illustrated in the 
figure below.  The cord itself is separated into right 
and left halves by an anterior fissure  and 
posterior sulcus.  A narrow band of gray matter 
called the gray commissure  forms a 
communication link between the two halves.  A 
central canal  continuous with the ventricles 
(cavities) of the brain is found in the gray 
commissure. Cerebral spinal fluid flows through it. 
The central portion of the  spinal cord is heavily 
concentrated with motor neuron and interneuron 
cell bodies and therefore appears as gray matter.  
(Sensory neuron cell bodies are in the dorsal root 
ganglion.)  The gray matter portions of the cord are 
called the horns and are named by location 
(anterior, posterior a nd lateral horns).  The outer 
portion of the spinal cord contains bundles of nerve 
fiber axons and dendrites carrying impulses upward 
to the brain (sensory information) and bundles 
carrying impulses downward from the brain (motor 
information).   The nerve fibers of the bundles are 
myelinated for rapid conduction and therefore 
appear as white matter .  The fiber bundles are 
referred to as nerve columns and are named for 
their location (anterior, posterior or lateral) in the 
cord as shown to the left.  Within the columns are 
bundles of nerve fibers called tracts. They are 
described according to the direction of nerve traffic. 
Ascending tracts carry sensory impulses to the brain 
and descending tracts carry motor impulses from 
the brain.  Specific tracts are norm ally named by 
giving the origin followed by the destination of 
impulses in the tract. For example, the 
spinothalamic tract would be an ascending tract 
(sensory) while the corticospinal tract would be a 
descending tract (motor).   
 Communication between the  peripheral 
nerves and the spinal cord occurs at 31 levels of the 
cord.  At each level, a pair of spinal nerves emerges 
from the cord and passes out from the vertebral 
column through an intervertebral foramen.  Each of 
the 62 spinal nerves is attached to t he cord at two 
points: a ventral root carrying motor information 
and a dorsal root that is sensory. 
SENSORY IMPULSES 
 Peripheral nerves transmitting somatic 
signals from surface receptors on the body serve as 
good examples of sensory pathways.  Sensory 
impulses travel from surface receptors along 
dendrites of the sensory nerves toward the spinal 
cord.  The dendrites enter the dorsal root.  Their 
nerve cell bodies are located in the dorsal root 
ganglion.  An axon extends from the cell body into 
the posterior horn of the spinal cord gray matter.  
From the posterior horn, interneurons carry the 
impulses to ascending tracts in the white matter of 
the cord to be carried to the brain.  Two of the  
ascending tracts carrying surface receptor impulses 
are the dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway 
and the anterolateral pathway.   
SPINAL CORD IN CROSS-SECTION 
a.  CENTRAL CANAL 
b.  ANTERIOR FISSURE 
c.  POSTERIOR SULCUS 
WHITE MATTER: 
      1. POSTERIOR (DORSAL) COLUMN 
      2. LATERAL COLUMN 
      3.  ANTERIOR (VENTRAL) COLUMN 
GRAY MATTER: 
      4. POSTERIOR (DORSAL) HORN with 
              INTERNEURON cell bodies 
       5. LATERAL HORN with 
               Autonomic MOTOR cell bodies 
       6. ANTERIOR (VENTRAL) HORN with 
                Somatic MOTOR cell bodies 
SPINAL NERVE: 
        7. DORSAL ROOT GANGLION with 
                 SENSORY neuron cell bodies 
        8. DORSAL (SENSORY) ROOT 
        9. VENTRAL (MOTOR) ROOT

===== PAGE 70 =====
66 
 
DORSAL COLUMN PATHWAY 
 Nerve fibers ascending through the dorsal 
(posterior) columns are myelinated and of large 
diameter.  Therefore, they transmit impulses 
rapidly; some over 100 m/sec.  T hey are suited for 
sensations that change rapidly.  In addition, these 
nerves have a high degree of spatial organization.  
The brain (cerebral cortex) is able to detect their 
point of origin with a high degree of localization.  
Impulses are transmitted with very fine gradations 
of intensity.   Receptors using this pathway are, 
however, limited to mechanoreceptors sensitive to 
touch, stretch and pressure. The pathway involves 
three sensory nerve fibers in series. 
 The first neuron carries the impulse from 
the receptor, through the dorsal columns, to the 
medulla oblongata at the base of the brain stem. 
There it synapses with the second sensory fiber that 
passes upward, through the medial lemniscus, to the 
thalamus.  Before ascending, the second fibers 
decussate (cross over).  Sensations arising from one 
side of the body will be perceived by the opposite 
side of the brain.  From the thalamus, a third 
sensory fiber projects upward into the cerebrum. 
(The thalamus is located at the core of the 
cerebrum.)  The inne r mass of the cerebrum 
consists mainly of white matter (myelinated) tracts 
including those transmitting sensory information 
from the thalamus.  Covering the cerebrum is a 
layer of gray matter called the cerebral cortex.   
 The cerebrum is divided into right and left 
hemispheres by a deep fissure running along the 
midline.  In turn, the hemispheres are separated into 
lobes by less prominent grooves, each referred to as 
a sulcus.  One is the central sulcus, running from 
medial to lateral across each hemispher e.  Each 
convolution (raised area) of the cortex is called a 
gyrus and the gyrus behind the central sulcus is 
called the post-central gyrus.  It is to this gyrus that 
most innervation from touch receptors from the 
surface of the skin traveling through the dorsal 
column-medial lemniscal pathway, project.   
 The high degree of localization 
characteristic of this system is reflected in the 
organization of the post-central gyrus.  The gyrus is 
mapped out, moving across from medial to lateral, 
beginning with sen sory innervation from the foot 
and ending on the lateral side with innervation from 
the head.  The concept that nerve pathways to and 
from specific parts of the body are permanently 
associated with specific areas of the central nervous 
system is referred t o as the labeled line principle.   
The post-central gyrus is referred to as the somatic 
sensory area of the cortex.  If the somatic sensory 
area is stimulated electrically, the subject would not 
report feeling any stimulation of his/her brain, but 
would report feeling the stimulation on the part of 
the body associated with the cortex area being 
stimulated.  "I feel something on my tongue."  "I 
feel something on my right shoulder." 
 The size of the cortex area devoted to a 
given amount of surface area on the body is directly 
related to the density of touch receptors on the body 
surface.  For example, fingertips have a very high 
density of touch receptors and are represented by a 
large area of cortex.  If two pins 2 millimeters apart 
touched the fingertips sim ultaneously, the cortex 
could perceive that there were indeed two pins.  On 
the back, where receptors are less dense, two pins 
touched any closer together than 50 millimeters 
apart might be perceived as only one pin. 
 Behind the somatic sensory area are located 
somatic sensory association areas.  Here we are 
able to interpret touch sensations.  For example, if 
the area associated with a "peach" were stimulated 
electrically, the subject would actually experience 
the feel of a peach.  It would feel spherical and 
appropriately soft and fuzzy. 
 One sense that requires very rapid 
transmission of afferent information is 
proprioception, the ability to sense the tension and 
position of the muscles.  For the brain to control 
skeletal muscles, it must know their current position 
and how they are moving at any given instant.  
Proprioception impulses are transmitted by the 
rapid dorsal column-medial lemniscal pathway. 
THE ANTEROLATERAL SYSTEM 
 Nerve fibers ascending through the 
anterolateral system are generally of small er 
diameter and many are not myelinated.  Therefore, 
they transmit impulses more slowly than the dorsal

===== PAGE 71 =====
67 
 
columns- 40 m/sec or less.  They are suited for 
sensations that change more slowly, and over 
broader areas.  They are less organized spatially and 
cannot localize the source of input with the fidelity 
of the dorsal column -medial lemniscal system.  
Receptors using this pathway include pain, thermal, 
crude touch, tickle and itch, and sexual stimuli. 
 The pathway involves two or three sensory 
nerve fibers in  series. Sensory nerves from the 
dorsal root of the spinal nerves synapse with the 
second sensory neuron in the posterior horn of the 
spinal cord.  The second neuron immediately 
crosses the cord through the gray commissure and 
ascends to the brain through the anterior 
spinothalamic tract or the lateral spinothalamic 
tract.  Impulses from the left side are projected to 
the right brain and spinal cord and visa versa.  From 
the thalamus, a third fiber may project upward to 
the sensory cortex.  Many fibers, esp ecially those 
for pain, terminate in brain stem nuclei.   
 
PAIN SENSATIONS 
 Pain is a protective mechanism that alerts 
the body to conditions that threaten to damage 
tissues.  Pain is of two types; fast (sharp) pain that 
is felt in a fraction of a second, and slow (aching) 
pain requiring seconds or minutes to occur.  Both 
types of pain receptors use the anterolateral 
pathways, however fast pain fibers are myelinated 
and larger than slow pain fibers.  They conduct at 
velocities of about 30 m/sec.  Slow fibers are small 
and unmyelinated conducting at about 1 m/sec.  
Fast pain fibers pass from the thalamus to the 
sensory cortex making fast pain easier to "localize" 
than slow pain.  On the other hand, the slow ache of 
chronic pain is centered in the brain stem a nd 
persists even if cortical centers are blocked.  Some 
brain stem pathways connect to the reticular 
activating system, bringing the body to full alert in 
an attempt to relieve the pain.   
 An example of the interplay between pain 
receptors would be an app endicitis attack.  The 
slow fibers innervating the appendix would produce 
an aching pain that would be "referred" to the 
general location in the abdomen from which the 
appendix migrated during fetal development, the 
general area around the umbilicus.  However, if the 
infection spreads to the abdominal wall covering 
the appendix, fast pain receptors in the wall will 
sense the exact location of the pain.  
SENSORY ADAPTATION 
 Different sensory systems of the body have 
different adaptive abilities. Receptors s ensing 
threatening conditions adapt very slowly, if at all.  
Examples include pain receptors, chemoreceptors 
controlling blood gasses and baroreceptors 
controlling blood pressure.   Other receptor systems 
adapt almost completely to a stimulus. 
 Mechanoreceptors vary in their ability to 
adapt.  Pacinian corpuscles of the skin adapt in a 
fraction of a second, necessary for their role in 
sensing vibration.  The corpuscle contains a viscous 
fluid that exerts pressure on the receptor only for 
the fraction of a s econd it takes the fluid to 
redistribute itself in response to the deformation of 
the corpuscle.  Baroreceptors that sense blood 
pressure will adapt in a day or two if blood pressure 
remains constant. The firing rate of the baroreceptor 
is proportional to the stimulus intensity.  But after a 
day or so, the firing rate begins to decrease even 
though the stimulus intensity remains the same.   
 Photoreceptors adapt by redistributing the 
photoreceptive pigments as described earlier.  
Chemoreceptors adapt slowly if at all.   Application 
of cologne is perceived by the wearer for only 
minutes.  Yet the odor is there; it is detected by 
persons coming in contact with the wearer for 
hours.  In this case, it is not the chemoreceptor that 
adapts.  The adaptation takes place centrally where 
afferent sensory impulses are inhibited in the 
olfactory bulb of the brain itself.  Thermoreceptors 
respond most strongly to changes in temperature, 
rapidly adapting to the new steady -state 
temperature, sensing it without further adaptation. 
 Because of the protective role for pain 
receptors, they do not adapt to pain but continue to 
respond until the threat is removed.  However, there 
are mechanisms to attenuate pain.  These involve 
neural pathways using the endorphin and 
enkephalin transmitters of the brain’s opiate system. 
 These are inhibitory transmitters that block 
transmission of pain impulses.  The pain control 
centers are located in the brain stem and posterior 
horns of the spinal cord.

===== PAGE 72 =====
68 
 
LESSON 23:  MOTOR PATHWAYS 
   
Basic motor control begins 
with neural circuits operating totally 
within the spinal cord. Indeed, 
experimental animals with cord 
transections at or below the level of 
the brain stem still exhibit the 
complex motor reflexes governing 
righting, walking, running, scratching 
and the like. Each spinal nerve has 
two roots. One is the posterior = dorsal = sensory = 
afferent root. The other is the anterior = ventral = 
motor = efferent root. 
SPINAL CORD REFLEXES 
 Stretching a muscle causes it to increase in 
length.  The increase is sensed by spindle fibers in 
the belly of the muscle and stretch receptors in the 
muscle tendons.  These receptors initiate a reflex 
contraction of the muscle.  This reflex, called the 
stretch reflex is exemplified in the knee jerk reflex. 
  Tapping the knee causes stretch in the 
tendon receptors and a nerve impulse projects 
from the receptor, through the dorsal root of the 
spinal nerve, to the anterior horn of the spinal 
cord. There is synapses with the motor nerve to 
the quadriceps m uscle of the thigh. A motor 
impulse causes the muscle to contract and the 
lower leg jerk forward. 
The purpose of the reflex is to prevent 
oscillations in the contraction by damping or 
smoothing the movement.  The reflex is normally 
facilitated by higher br ain centers, and a stronger 
than normal response indicate damage to higher 
motor pathways.  But the reflex is spinal in nature. 
If the cord were transected, the reflex would 
initially disappear because of loss of brain 
facilitation.  However, once the cord  had adapted 
to loss of  higher control, the reflex would 
reappear even without nerve impulses from the 
brain. 
 Most spinal reflexes are a bit more 
complicated, involving at least one interneuron.  In 
the flexor reflex, stimulation by a painful stimulus 
can cause reflex muscle flexion.  Stepping on a tack 
causes flexion of the muscles of the affected leg, 
pulling the foot on that leg off of the stimulus 
(tack).    
This is an ipsilateral (same side) reflex.  At 
the same time, an extensor reflex in the opposit e 
limb occurs, causing the opposite leg to straighten 
(extend).  This allows that leg to bear the entire 
weight of the body, enabling the person to remain 
standing. Here, interneurons are involved. 
Interneurons carry the stimulus from the posterior 
horn of the spinal cord to the anterior hours of the 
spinal cord. For the flexor reflex, the impulse is 
project to the anterior horn on the same side of the 
spinal cord. This is an ipsilateral reflex. For the 
extensor reflex, the interneuron projects across the 
gray commissure to the anterior horn on the 
opposite side. This is a contralateral reflex. 
 Examples of inhibitory pathways can also 
be found within the spinal cord.  When a group of 
muscles contract to produce a movement, the 
antagonist muscles must simult aneously remain 
relaxed.  In the reflex pathway just described, 
reciprocal innervation of muscles blocks impulses 
to extensors to keep them relaxed when flexors 
contract and visa versa.  This is called reciprocal 
inhibition. 
 Many of the most common motor 
behaviors are coordinated by neural circuits 
originating within the spinal cord itself.  In an 
animal with spinal transection from higher brain 
centers, pressure on the soles of the feet will cause 
it to stand or even make walking movements, 
tickling its pelt will cause it to scratch, laying it on

===== PAGE 73 =====
69 
 
its back will cause it to attempt to right itself.  
Movements involving multiple muscle groups 
acting simultaneously are made possible by spinal 
reflex pathways and reciprocal innervation. 
CEREBRAL CORTEX MOTOR PATHWAYS 
 The outer layer of gray matter covering the 
cerebrum is called the cerebral cortex. The 
primary motor cortex lies along the pre-central 
gyrus of the cerebral cortex, just in front of the 
central sulcus.  Like the sensory area on the post -
central gyrus, the pre -central gyrus is mapped out, 
moving from medial to lateral, beginning with 
muscles of the foot and ending on the lateral side 
with muscles of facial expression.  More than half 
of the gyrus controls muscles of the hands, fingers 
and face.  Sti mulation of these areas might cause 
only a small number of muscle fibers to contract, 
necessary for producing fine movements.  This is 
tied to the concept of motor units discussed earlier. 
Stimulation of cortex areas less well represented 
would cause a lar ger group of muscles to contract. 
In the large leg muscles, contraction of just a few 
muscle fibers would have no effect. Anterior to the 
primary motor cortex is a pre-motor cortex.  
Neurons here stimulate muscle groups involved in 
particular tasks such as  word formation or hand 
skills.   
 Most fibers from the cortex pass down the 
brain stem and spinal cord through the lateral 
corticospinal tract.  Fibers cross the brain stem in 
the medulla oblongata, such that the motor cortex 
on a given side of the brain controls skeletal 
muscles on the opposite side of the body.  Fibers 
passing from cortex areas for muscles involved with 
detailed movement, particularly hand and finger 
muscles move directly down the cord to the 
appropriate level of the spinal cord.  Fibers  
controlling other muscles synapse in brain stem 
nuclei.  While damage to the motor cortex seriously 
impairs delicate movements, gross motor activity 
can still be controlled.  The cortex is involved more 
with "commanding" muscles to contract.  Control 
occurs mainly in the brain stem and spinal cord  
itself.   
ANTIGRAVITY MUSCLES 
 Extensor muscles that straighten the 
vertebral column and extend the arms and legs are 
important in maintaining an erect posture against 
the forces of gravity.  These muscles are controlled 
from brain stem nuclei.  One of these centers that 
receives its primary sensory afferent information 
from the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear, 
consists of a group of vestibular nuclei  in the 
medulla oblongata.  Motor nerves are carried to the 
antigravity muscles through the lateral and medial 
vestibulospinal tracts.   
THE VESTIBULAR APPARATUS 
 Besides sensing hearing, the inner ear is 
also important in equilibrium and balance.  A 
portion of the inner ear called the vestibule extends 
from the  cochlea.  The vestibule contains two 
membranous chambers called the saccule and 
utricle.  Within these chambers are hair cells 
supported in a gel matrix.  Calcium carbonate 
particles called otoliths are entangled in them.  The 
forces of gravity acting on the otoliths cause them 
to be pushed or pulled in different directions against 
the receptor surface of the hair cells.  By sensing 
the direction of gravitational force, the hair cells 
can deduce the position of the head. Action 
potentials from the hair cells are transmitted to the 
brain through the eighth cranial nerves, the same 
nerves carrying impulses from the cochlea.  The 
vestibular apparatus is primarily involved with the 
ability to perceive the position of the head or static 
equilibrium.  It is also able to sense linear 
acceleration, but angular motion requires the 
semicircular canals. 
 Extending from the vestibular apparatus are 
three semicircular canals , positioned at right 
angles to each other.  Each canal has an enlarged 
portion at one end called the ampulla.  Within the 
ampulla are hair cells also supported in a gel 
matrix.  Motion of the head causes the endolymph 
of the semicircular canals to swirl through the 
ampullae and push against the hair cells.  The force 
of the swirling endolymph is diffe rent within the 
different ampullae depending on the direction of 
head motion.  Resulting nerve impulses are 
interpreted as movement of the head.  The

===== PAGE 74 =====
70 
 
semicircular canals sense acceleration, deceleration, 
and head rotation.  They are, therefore, more 
involved with dynamic equilibrium.   
 One example of the usefulness of vestibular 
sensations is the ability to continue looking at a 
particular object even when the head is moving.  As 
the head moves to the right, the extrinsic eye 
muscles move the eyes to the l eft at exactly the 
same rate to compensate.   However, if the swirling 
has gained sufficient momentum and the head stops 
too rapidly, the momentum of the fluid causes it to 
continue its movement.  The eyes, believing the 
head is still moving, continue to s can in the 
opposite direction and we feel as if the world is 
spinning.  
THE CEREBELLUM 
 The cerebellum is a large mass of neural 
tissue located below the cerebrum and behind the 
brain stem.  It functions to monitor and make 
adjustments to the motor activities initiated by other 
areas of the central nervous system. It receives 
information regarding the desired sequence of 
muscle contraction from higher brain centers 
including the cerebral cortex. It also receives 
information concerning the present position a nd 
motion of muscles from peripheral receptors 
including the proprioceptors. If the desired 
movement doesn't compare favorably to the 
movement actually occurring, the cerebellum sends 
corrective signals outward to adjust the muscle 
activity appropriately.  As a result, movements are 
smooth and fluid.  This level of control is especially 
important in rapid movements that require a high 
level of coordination; movements associated with 
running or dancing or playing a musical instrument. 
Without cerebellar inpu t, rapid movements still 
occur, but become very abnormal. Slower 
movements are less affected. 
 Another control function of the cerebellum 
involves the sequencing of movements.  The 
cerebellum predicts and plans for the next 
movement even while the present movement is still 
underway.   Some movements occur so rapidly that 
the entire sequence of muscle actions must be 
planned prior to execution.  These movements are 
called ballistic movements and require cerebellar 
control to occur in a normal way.  Punching fingers 
down on a keyboard is an example of a ballistic 
movement. 
 Cerebellar control is learned. The 
cerebellum learns from its mistakes and gradually 
improves on its control.  A young child learning to 
eat needs a bib. But gradually the feeding 
movements become smooth and coordinated.  A 
child learning to walk moves with a staggered gate. 
Walking movements become more fluid as 
cerebellar control improves.  
THE BASAL GANGLIA 
 The basal ganglia are gray matter areas 
found deep within the white matter tracts  of the 
cerebrum.  They receive input from the cerebral 
cortex and send output back to the cerebral cortex.  
The basal ganglia are involved in the cognitive 
control of patterns of behavior.  These include 
"skilled" types of movements.  Examples include 
athletic skills, penmanship skills, and job skills such 
as those involved in crafts such as woodworking.  
Output from the basal ganglia would go to pre -
motor areas of the cortex involved with controlling 
combinations of muscles rather than primary motor 
cortex areas controlling individual muscles. 
 Basal ganglia control of motor function 
makes use of cognitive processes.  That is, thinking 
processes combining current sensory input with 
memory input from past experiences stored mainly 
in the cerebral cortex.  This gives one the ability to 
plan and execute rapid motor responses based on 
current information and past experience. 
 Finally, the basal ganglia provide an overall 
inhibitory or dampening effect on muscle 
contractions, helping to stabilize or "steady" 
contracting muscles. Most neurotransmitter 
substances used by basal ganglia neurons are 
inhibitory transmitters. Disease processes involving 
basal ganglia centers result is various kinds of 
uncontrolled spontaneous movements ranging from 
tremors to flailing m ovements of the appendages.  
Parkinson's disease and Huntington's chorea are 
examples.  Parkinson's disease  is caused by 
relatively low concentrations of the 
neurotransmitter dopamine.  It is characterized by 
rigidity of voluntary muscles and tremors of th e 
fingers and extremities.  Huntington's chorea is a 
genetic disease characterized by flicking 
movements in the joints and distorted , exagerated 
movements of the entire body.  It's caused by loss of 
cells that secrete the inhibitory neurotransmitter 
GABA.

===== PAGE 75 =====
71 
 
LESSON 24:  THE BRAIN  
 
 For purposes of discussion, we shall divide 
the brain into six parts: the cerebrum, the 
cerebellum, the diencephalon, the mesencephalon, 
the pons and the medulla oblongata. The last three 
will be considered collectively as the brain stem. 
CEREBRUM 
 The cerebrum makes up about two -thirds 
of the brain.  It is divided into left and right cerebral 
hemispheres separated by the longitudinal fissure. 
 Each hemisphere is further divided into lobes 
named for the cranial bone that covers and protects 
them: the frontal lobe , parietal lobe , occipital 
lobe, and temporal lobe .  The lobes are also 
separated from each other by sulcus that is less well 
defined as the longitudinal fissure. The central 
sulcus separates the frontal lobe from the parietal 
lobes.  The lateral sulcus separates the frontal and 
parietal lobes from the temporal lobes.  There is no 
well-defined sulcus between the occipital and 
parietal lobes. 
 
 The outer five millimeters or so thickness 
of the cerebrum is compos ed of dense layers of 
nerve cell bodies and appears as gray matter.  This 
is called the cerebral cortex .  Although only 
several millimeters in thickness, the cerebral cortex 
contains about 100 billion neurons .  In order to 
accommodate the large number of n eurons, the 
surface is thrown into folds.  Each surface 
convolution thus formed is called a gyrus. The 
depression or fold between gyri is called a sulcus.  
 Functionally, the cortex contains sensory, 
motor, and association areas. Many of these areas 
have b een mapped out using various techniques 
including electrical stimulation of the exposed 
cortex.  For example, the precentral gyrus of each 
hemisphere (the cortex region just anterior to the 
central sulcus) is a somatic motor area .  
Stimulation of this part  of the cortex causes 
contractions of skeletal muscles.  The precentral 
gyrus is organized relative to the parts of the body 
the muscles control.  Moving up, across and then 
down the gyrus from medial to lateral, muscles 
responding move from toes to feet to leg to trunk to 
arm to hand to fingers to head. 
 The post central gyrus of each hemisphere 
(the cortex area just posterior to the central sulcus) 
is a somatic sensory area .  Direct stimulation of 
this part of the cortex would be perceived by the 
subject as something touching a certain part of their 
body.  It too is localized in similar fashion as the 
motor area- face, hand, arm, torso, legs, feet. 
 Examples of other localized functional 
areas of the cortex include an auditory area in each 
temporal lobe as sociated with hearing, and the 
occipital lobe cortex on either side associated with 
vision.  
 While the sensory and motor functions 
described above have control areas in both 
hemispheres, the hemispheres are different. For 
most of us, the left hemisphere is the categorical or 
“dominant” hemisphere. Language and all 
language-based abilities including science, math 
and logic, are seated in the categorical hemisphere. 
For example, the motor speech area (Broca’s area) 
found in the frontal lobe of the categorica l 
hemisphere enables us to communicate in words.  
 The opposite hemisphere (right for most of 
us) is referred to as the representational 
hemisphere. It views the word in a more holistic 
way. It is the seat of imagination, music, art, 
perception of patterns , spatial relationships, and 
comparisons of smells, tastes, sights, and sounds. 
 Besides sensory and motor areas, all lobes 
of the cortex also contain association areas.  For 
example, behind the somatic sensory area (touch) is 
an association area for touch . Stimulation of the 
sensory area would be perceived as something 
touching my body. Stimulation of the touch 
association area might be interpreted as something 
“fuzzy” touching my body. Stimulate the auditory 
area and you perceive it as a sound. Stimulate the 
association area surrounding the auditory area and 
you might associate the sound - a bell, a robin, 
someone’s voice. The somatic motor cortex causes

===== PAGE 76 =====
72 
 
individual muscles to contract. The association area 
in front of the motor cortex produces complex 
movements, the result of many muscles contracting 
in proper sequence. These areas reach their highest 
development in the human species.  Not only can 
we associate sensory information and motor 
responses, but we can also store information using 
cortex neurons (m emory) and process this 
information to solve problems (reason).  
 The somatic, visual and auditory 
association areas all come together at the top and 
back of the temporal lobe. This confluence of 
different sensory interpretive areas is most highly 
developed in the categorical (usually left) 
hemisphere and is considered to be the seat of 
intelligence. It is called the general interpretive 
area (Wernicke’s area). 
 Parietal lobe association areas involve 
understanding speech and using words to express 
ourselves on the categorical hemisphere and 
interpretation of nonverbal experiences (art and 
music) on the representational hemisphere. 
 The neurons of the cortex and lower brain 
centers are interconnected by myelinated white 
matter tracts coursing through the cer ebrum below 
the cortex.  The cortex of the right hemisphere 
communicates with the cortex of the left 
hemisphere via myelinated fibers of the corpus 
callosum, located at the bottom of the longitudinal 
fissure.  Since each hemisphere carries out different 
functions ( categorical vs. representational), the 
corpus callosum is functionally quite important. 
 There are regions of gray matter deep 
within the cerebrum called the basal ganglia.  As 
discussed earlier, the basal ganglia act together with 
the cerebral co rtex to control "patterns" of the 
behavior.  In addition, inhibitory neurons act to 
"steady" our muscular movements. 
 A region in the temporal lobes referred to 
as the amygdala serves as the center of the limbic 
system, brain areas extending to the diencephalon 
and base of the cerebrum that control emotions and 
motivational behavior.  The amygdala interprets the 
information- a disgusting sight, an enjoyable 
experience. Output goes in two directions. Output 
to the hypothalamus and other lower brain centers 
causes a visceral response- heart races, hair stands 
on end. Output to the pre -frontal cortex is 
responsible for our behavioral response to the 
emotional experience- fighting, fleeing, embracing. 
Damage or stimulation of areas associated with our 
emotions c an lead to blunted or exaggerated 
responses to emotional experiences. Damage to the 
amygdala can completely abolish any sense of fear. 
Controlling our emotions serves a survival function 
motivating us to fight that which threatens us or to 
flee from threats that we cannot overcome. 
THE CEREBELLUM 
 Located below the occipital lobe and 
behind the brain stem is the second largest portion 
of the brain, the cerebellum.  As discussed earlier, 
the cerebellum coordinates muscle movements, 
making them occur in a smooth and fluid way.   
THE DIENCEPHALON 
 The diencephalon is located at the top of 
the brain stem and is surrounded by the cerebrum.  
Its two main parts are the thalamus and the 
hypothalamus.  The thalamus serves as a relay 
center for higher areas of the bra in.  It is a crude 
sensory area, not well mapped out like the 
postcentral gyrus.  Certain sensations of a more 
generalized nature, like slow pain, are perceived 
mainly in the thalamus.   
 The hypothalamus is a link between the 
nervous system that communica tes with electrical 
impulses and the endocrine system that 
communicates with hormones.  It produces 
antidiuretic hormone  (ADH) that acts on the 
kidney to retain water.  It produces oxytocin that 
stimulates uterine contractions.  It also produces 
hormones that control the pituitary gland, a small 
gland connected to the base of the hypothalamus.   
 Neural functions of the hypothalamus 
include centers that provide for the body's basic 
needs (survival): a thirst center, a center 
controlling appetite, one regula ting body 
temperature, and an area controlling sexual 
cycles, to name a few.   
 Within the hypothalamus, specific 
anatomical regions associated with reward and 
punishment are found. When stimulated in 
experimental animals, these areas have profound 
effects on behavior.  A rat taught to push a lever 
that triggers electrical stimulation of a reward 
center will push the lever to the exclusion of all 
other behaviors including eating and drinking.

===== PAGE 77 =====
73 
 
Studies of this kind provide insights to addictive, 
self-destructive behaviors we are all subject to. 
THE BRAIN STEM 
 Collectively, the brain stem consists of the 
mesencephalon (midbrain) extending down from 
the diencephalon, the pons and the medulla 
oblongata, just above and connected to the spinal 
cord.  In one sense , these structures might be 
thought of as extensions of the spinal cord, but 
because they are located within the skull, they are 
considered part of the brain.  They do contain 
tracts, such as the medial lemniscus, spinaothalamic 
or corticospinal tracts dis cussed earlier; tracts that 
communicate with higher brain centers.  But the 
brain stem is more than a spinal cord extension.  
Like the hypothalamus, it contains nuclei that 
control vital life functions.  Most reflexes of the 
autonomic nervous system that control involuntary 
muscle are centered in the brain stem.  Recall that 
the pons and medulla oblongata act as centers for 
control of breathing and blood pressure.  Reflexes 
that control the antigravity muscles are centered in 
nuclei of the brain stem, inclu ding the vestibular 
nuclei discussed previously.   
THE RETICULAR FORMATION 
  The reticular formation, also called the 
reticular activating system, acts to control the flow 
of information passing through the brain stem.  
When the reticular formation is acti ve, we’re 
awake.  When the system is suppressed, we sleep. 
In addition, the reticular formation helps to filter 
out unimportant sensory information.  Without 
some sort of filtering, the cortex would be totally 
overwhelmed with input.  When activated by a loud 
noise or pain, for example, our senses are 
heightened and more afferent information gets 
through.  Neurons of the reticular formation extend 
throughout the entire length of the brain stem.   
Injury to these neurons can place the victim in a 
coma with n o arousal from even the strongest 
stimulation   
 Sleep is an unconscious state from which 
one can be aroused by sensory or other stimuli. 
That one can be aroused distinguishes sleep from 
coma. Sleep is known to be an active process 
initiated within the ret icular formation. There are 
two different types of sleep- slow-wave and REM 
(rapid eye movement) sleep. 
  Slow-wave sleep is a deep sleep that 
occurs during the first hour of the sleep cycle.  It is 
extremely restful sleep associated with a drop in 
peripheral vascular tone and many other vegetative 
functions. There is a 10 -30% decrease in blood 
pressure, respiratory rate and metabolic rate. 
Dreams occurring in slow -wave sleep are not 
recorded into memory.  
 As one becomes more rested, intermittent 
episodes of REM sleep begin to occur every 90 
minutes or so. Bouts of REM sleep generally last 
from 5 to 30 minutes each. REM sleep is associated 
with active dreaming greatly depressed muscle 
movement. Persons are actually more difficult to 
arouse during REM sleep. The brain is very active 
during REM sleep; brain metabolism may increase 
as much as 20%.  
 The brain itself benefits the most from 
sleep. Prolonged periods of wakefulness are 
associated with progressive malfunction of thought 
processes and sometimes even abnormal behavioral 
activities. Persons can become irritable and even 
psychotic after periods of forced wakefulness.   
 INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
 One of the higher brain functions most 
highly developed in the human brain is the ability to 
process information. This involves acquiring new 
information ( learning), storing and retrieving 
information ( memory) and eliminating trivial or 
unused information ( forgetting). Forgetting is 
actually quite important because if all information 
were retained indefinitely, the ability to process 
information would be completely overwhelmed.  
 Brain injured persons are often unable to 
store new information ( anterograde amnesia) or 
retrieve existing information ( retrograde 
amnesia).  It is a defect in declarative memory- 
for example, the ability to recall past events. It does 
not affect skill (procedural) memory- the ability 
to tie your shoes, for example. 
 The hippocampus in the temporal lobes is 
an important learning center. It learns from sensory 
input while the event is happenin g. Then it 
repeatedly “plays” this memory into other areas 
within the cerebral cortex for long-term storage.  
 Synaptic pathways through the brain are 
not permanent and fixed. Learning and memory 
involve creating information pathways through the 
brain by m odifying existing synapses or creating 
new synaptic pathways.  Three types of memory

===== PAGE 78 =====
74 
 
that are generally recognized are short -term, 
intermediate long-term and long-term. 
 Short-term memory lasts for seconds and 
enables us to remember what just happened 
allowing a sequence of events to flow together. It 
enables us to remember a phone number long 
enough for us to dial it, as long as we keep thinking 
about it. It probably occurs as a nerve impulse 
reverberates or “echoes” for a few seconds. 
 Intermediate long-term memory can last 
for minutes (looking for lost car keys) or hours 
(“cramming” for an exam).  It probably involves 
mechanisms that enable specific neurons to fire 
more easily or release more neurotransmitter when 
stimulated. For example, pre -synaptic fac ilitation 
can increase the influx of calcium ions in pre -
synaptic neurons that is necessary for vesicles to 
release neurotransmitter. It’s the opposite of pre -
synaptic inhibition discussed earlier. The amount of 
information that can be stored is limited. 
 Long-term memory  enables large 
amounts of information to be stored up to a 
lifetime. It involves a more deliberate learning 
process characterized by repetition and 
reinforcement. Long -term memory involves 
physical remodeling of synapses with more 
transmitter vesicles in pre-synaptic neurons or more 
receptor sites on post -synaptic neurons. It can also 
involve formation of new synapses through growth 
and branching of new nerve processes, or 
reconfiguring existing cells to enable them to 
discharge more easily.   
CEREBRAL SPINAL FLUID 
 Cavities within the brain contain capillary 
tufts that produce a filtrate of blood closely 
resembling plasma called cerebral spinal fluid  
(CSF).  CSF is produced continuously and flows 
through the cavities of the brain (the four 
ventricles) and the central canal of the spinal cord.   
 Surrounding the brain and spinal cord are 
three layers of connective tissue membranes called 
the meninges.  The outer two layers ( dura mater 
and arachnoid mater) form a sort of loose sack 
around the b rain and spinal cord.    A third layer, 
the pia mater, fits tightly over the surface of the 
brain and spinal cord.  The space thus formed 
between the arachnoid mater and pia mater is the 
subarachnoid space .  CSF flows out from the 
ventricles of the brain a nd around the brain and 
spinal cord through the subarachnoid space. 
 Suspending the brain in CSF prevents the 
compressional damage to brain tissue that would 
occur if it were resting on the floor of the cranium. 
It also functions to sbsorb shocks from any impacts 
to the head.  The total volume of CSF is about 150 
ml.  CSF is produced continuously and is totally 
replaced about three times a day.  This means it has 
to be reabsorbed into the blood at the same rate it's 
produced.  Since the skull cannot expand,  any 
accumulation of CSF would increase intracranial 
pressure (that is normally about 10 mm Hg) and 
squeeze brain capillaries leading to permanent brain 
damage.  The condition is called hydrocephalus. 
 The endothelial cells of most brain 
capillaries form tight junctions that act as selective 
barriers for transport between blood and the fluid of 
the brain, both interstitial fluid and CSF.  This is 
often referred to as the "blood -brain barrier".  It is 
quite permeable to water, respiratory gases and 
lipid sol uble molecules (like alcohol). But 
electrolytes and large organic molecules in the 
blood that might interfere with nerve activity in the 
brain are excluded.    
CRANIAL NERVES 
 The brain and spinal cord comprise the 
central nervous system. Thirty -one pairs of spinal 
nerves branch off from the spinal cord, as discussed 
previously. These spinal nerves, along with their 
branches, form the spinal portion of the peripheral 
nervous system. In addition, twelve pairs of cranial 
nerves emerge from the diencepahlon an d brain 
stem. They are involved with motor and sensory 
function associated with the head and neck. Motor 
nerves would include nerves to control eye 
movements, swallowing and facial expression. 
Sensory nerves would include nerves for vision, 
taste, smell, hearing and facial touch. 
 One pair of cranial nerves actually passes 
down the neck and into the thoracic and abdominal 
cavities.  The nerves, called the vagus nerves, help 
to control involuntary function in all internal organs 
of the thoracic and abdominal cavities.  Damage 
to the spinal cord would therefore not affect 
function of the thoracic and upper abdominal 
organs.

===== PAGE 79 =====
75 
 
LESSON 25:  THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM   
 
Cardiac muscle, visceral muscle and 
glandular secretory activity are controlled by the 
autonomic nervous system .  A nerve, such as a 
cranial nerve or spinal nerve or the sciatic nerve in 
the leg, is basically a bundle of individual nerve 
fibers.  Nerve fiber refers to the axons or dendrites 
of individual neurons (nerve cells).  Each individual 
nerve fiber is specialized, carrying only one 
particular kind of impulse.  Some, for example, are 
sensory in nature while others carry only motor 
impulses.  An individual nerve fiber cannot be both 
sensory and motor.  Individual nerve fibers within a 
nerve can also be classified as either somatic or 
autonomic, but not both.  Somatic nerve fibers 
control voluntary muscle and autonomic nerve 
fibers control involuntary muscle and some glands. 
A nerve can contain a mixture of sensory and 
motor nerve fibers.  It  can contain a mixture of 
autonomic and somatic nerve fibers. 
 In some parts of the nervous system, 
sensory and motor nerve fibers do not travel in the 
same nerve.  Recall that the dorsal root of a spinal 
nerve has only sensory nerve fibers and the ventral 
root only motor nerve fibers.  Autonomic fibers also 
travel as separate bundles of fibers as they branch 
off from cranial nerves or spinal nerves .  For 
example, shortly after passing from the vertebral 
column, the dorsal and ventral roots of spinal 
nerves join forming a single nerve of mixed sensory 
and motor, somatic and autonomic nerve fibers.  
But almost immediately, a bundle of autonomic 
nerve fibers called the white ramus branches off 
the main spinal nerve.  All of the autonomic fibers 
leave the spinal nerve at this point.  Another bundle 
of nerve fibers called the gray ramus reconnects 
with the spinal nerve next to the white ramus 
allowing some of the autonomic fibers to return to 
the spinal nerve. 
 Autonomic sensory afferent fibers  
conduct sensory i mpulses toward the central 
nervous system.  Visceral receptors sense changes 
in blood pressure, gastrointestinal activity, blood 
oxygen levels, body temperature, and the like.  In 
the case of autonomic sensory afferent fibers 
associated with the spinal cor d, the nerve fibers 
enter the cord by way of the dorsal root along with 
somatic sensory afferent fibers.  Their cell bodies 
are located in the dorsal root ganglion. 
 Autonomic motor efferent fibers  are 
organized differently than the somatic motor fibers. 
Somatic motor neurons associated with the spinal 
cord have their cell bodies in the anterior horn of 
the spinal cord.  But autonomic motor neuron cell 
bodies are found in the lateral horn of the spinal 
cord.  For somatic motor neuron pathways, a single 
motor neuron bridges the distance between the 
brain or spinal cord and skeletal muscle fiber - a 
distance that can be several feet in length.  For the 
autonomic motor pathway, two motor neurons in 
series bridge the gap between the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the involuntary muscle or gland. 
The two fibers synapse with each other at an 
autonomic ganglion (cluster of neuron cell bodies) 
somewhere between the CNS and the effector.  The 
nerve fiber originating from the CNS is called the 
preganglionic fiber. The  fiber that ultimately 
synapses with the effector is called the 
postganglionic fiber.  For spinal autonomics, the 
preganglionic motor neuron cell body is in the 
lateral horn of the spinal cord and the 
postganglionic motor neuron cell body is in the 
autonomic ganglion itself. The postganglionic 
fibers go on to innervate visceral smooth muscle, 
cardiac muscle or glands. 
 Peripheral autonomic nerve fibers emerge 
from the central nervous system at three levels: 
 The cranial autonomics are associated with 
four pa irs of cranial nerves; specifically the 
oculomotor nerves (III), the facial nerves (VII), 
the glossopharyngeal nerves (IX) and the vagus 
nerves (X).  The other eight pairs of cranial 
nerves have no autonomic fibers. 
 The thoracolumbar autonomics are found a s 
part of spinal nerve pairs C -8 (cervical), T -1

===== PAGE 80 =====
76 
 
through T -12 (thoracic) and L -1 & L -2 
(lumbar). 
 The sacral autonomics are associated with 
sacral nerve pairs S-2, S-3 and S-4 (sacral). 
 Postganglionic motor neurons have their 
cell bodies in the autonomic ganglia.  These ganglia 
are categorized according to location.  There are 
three types: 
 The paravertebral ganglia are arranged along 
either side of the vertebral column.  On each 
side, individual ganglia are interconnected to 
the ones above and below, and fo rming a 
“chain” of ganglia. 
 The prevertebral ganglia are located just in 
front of the vertebral column.  These ganglia 
are also interconnected by networks of nerves 
called plexuses. The solar plexus  is one 
example.  
 The two types of ganglia just described  
receive preganglionic axons from the 
thoracolumbar autonomics.  Since the ganglia 
described above are relatively close to the spinal 
cord, the preganglionic fibers are short and the 
postganglionic fibers are long. 
 A third type of ganglia, t he terminal ganglia, 
are located near the end of the autonomic 
efferent pathway.  They are next to, or actually 
incorporated in, the effector organ tissue.  The 
preganglionic fiber is long and the 
postganglionic fiber short.  Because of their 
anatomic location, terminal ganglia are not able 
to interconnect.  Terminal ganglia receive 
preganglionic impulses from the cranial and 
sacral autonomic efferents. 
 Based on both anatomic and functional 
characteristics, the autonomic nervous system is 
divided into two divisions: 
 The sympathetic division includes all 
autonomic nerve pathways whose preganglionic 
fibers stem from the thoracolumbar region of 
the spinal cord.  The "sympathetic" division 
comes to the aid of the body during times of 
stress. 
 The parasympathetic division inclu des all 
autonomic nerve pathways whose fibers arise 
from the craniosacral branches of the CNS.  
Because the craniosacral nerves emerge above 
and below the sympathetic, they are called the 
"parasympathetics" (para = around). 
 Recall that an electrical impul se cannot 
cross a synapse.  Neurotransmitter chemicals cross 
the synapse.  The neurotransmitter used at the 
synapses between pre- and post-ganglionic neurons 
in paravertebral, collateral and terminal ganglia is 
acetylcholine.  Postganglionic axons go on to  
synapse with visceral effectors (involuntary muscle 
and glands). Most organs are under dual 
innervation.  For example, both branches of the 
autonomic nervous system innervate the heart.  
They act antagonistically.  The sympathetic fibers 
speed up the hear t while parasympathetic fibers 
slow it down. If both sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nerves stimulated the effector 
using the same neurotransmitter, how would the 
effector know which way to respond?  At the 
synapse between the postganglionic nerve and the 
muscle or gland, acetylcholine is the transmitter 
only for the parasympathetic neurons.   
Norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter associated 
with sympathetic fibers.  In this way the effector 
can differentiate between sympathetic and 
parasympathetic stimuli. There are a few exceptions 
discussed below.    
 At the neuromuscular junctions, fibers with 
acetylcholine as the transmitter are called 
cholinergic and fibers that use norepinephrine are 
called adrenergic.  (Norepinephrine is also called 
noradrenalin.) Synapses at the autonomic 
neuromuscular junctions are adrenergic for 
sympathetic nerves and cholinergic for 
parasympathetic nerves.   
 The parasympathetic nervous system 
controls routine bodily functions under normal, 
unstressed conditions.  Its effects ar e localized to 
specific organ systems as needed without affecting

===== PAGE 81 =====
77 
 
other systems.  Sympathetic nerves are active 
during times of stress.  The sympathetic system is 
called the "fight or flight" system.  The networks of 
nerves interconnecting its ganglia make  
sympathetic responses more general in nature, 
involving many organ systems simultaneously. 
Each system is necessary. The 
parasympathetic helps conserve bodily resources.  
The sympathetic enables us to respond to stress.  In 
the context of the sympathetic nervous system, 
stress includes not only unusual situations involving 
danger.  Stress also includes routine activities -  
running to catch a bus. There are exceptions to dual 
innervation.  The sweat glands, adrenal glands and 
arrector pili muscles of the skin are innervated only 
by the sympathetic nervous system.  Since there are 
no parasympathetic competitors, two different 
transmitter chemicals are not required.  
Acetylcholine is used at all of the ne rve and 
neuromuscular synapses. 
 
SYMPATHETIC 
1. Nerve impulses originate from the thoracolumbar 
preganglionic autonomic fibers. 
2. Synapses between the pre - and post -ganglionic 
neurons are located in the prevertebral and 
paravertebral ganglia.  The ganglia are 
interconnected making the effects generalized. 
3. The preg anglionic fibers are short and the 
postganglionic fibers are long. 
4. Norepinephrine is the neurotransmitter at the 
synapse of the postganglionic motor nerve with 
the effector. 
5. The sympathetic is the division of the nervous 
system that comes to the aid of the body in times 
of stress. 
6. Metabolic energy is rapidly consumed. 
7. Effects as specific organs respond to the stress: 
a. Pupils of the eyes dilate to allow more light access to 
rods and cones. 
b. Salivary gland secretions are reduced.  Mouth 
becomes dry. 
c. Heart rate and strength of beat increase providing 
added blood flow for oxygen delivery. 
d. Airways dilate and lung ventilation increases bringing 
more oxygen to the lungs. 
e. Liver releases stored glucose into the blood for use 
as fuel for energy production. 
f. Adrenal glands release the hormones norepinephrine 
and epinephrine that reinforce the sympathetic 
response. 
g. Kidneys produce less urine as blood flow to them is 
reduced. 
h. Urinary bladder walls relax and sphincter tightens 
retaining urine. 
i. Digestive system activity is inhibited.  Secretion and 
motility decrease. 
j. Blood vessels divert flow away from abdominal 
organs to skeletal muscle. 
k. Arrector pili muscles of skin constrict causing goose 
bumps. 
l. Sweat glands, particularly those of armpit and groin, 
increase secretory activity. 
PARASYMPATHETIC 
1. Nerve impulses originate from the craniosacral 
preganglionic autonomic fibers. 
2. Synapses between the pre - and post -ganglionic 
neurons are located in the terminal ganglia.  The 
ganglia are not interconne cted so effects are 
localized to specific organ systems. 
3. The preganglionic fibers are long and the 
postganglionic fibers are short. 
4. Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter at the 
synapse of the postganglionic motor nerve with 
the effector. 
5. The parasympathetic is the division of the nervous 
system that takes care of us in quiet times 
between stresses. 
6. Metabolic energy (ATP) is conserved. 
7. Effects on specific organs are conservative: 
a. Pupils constrict reducing the amount of light entering 
eye to conserve rods and cones. 
b. Salivary gland secretions increase as food is 
ingested. 
c. Heart rate and strength of beat are reduced 
conserving the heart at rest. 
d. Airways constrict and lung ventilation is reduced as 
energy is conserved. 
e. Liver stores glucose in preparation for increased 
need at a later time. 
f. Adrenal glands have no innervation from the 
parasympathetic nervous system. The glands are 
exceptions to the “dual innervation” concept. 
g. Kidneys produce urine at an appropriate rate to clear 
metabolites and balance body water. 
h. Urinary bladder responds normally to the micturition 
reflex and voluntary control. 
i. Digestive system secretion and motility increase as 
needed for proper digestion at mealtime. 
j. Blood vessels provide appropriate flow to organs of 
the digestive and urinary systems. 
k. Arrector pili muscles are not innervated.  
 
l. Sweat glands are not innervated.

===== PAGE 82 =====
78 
 
LESSON 26:  TRANSPORT AND DIGESTION OF NUTRIENTS  
 
The digestive system is centered around a 
tube called the gastrointestinal (GI) tr act.  The 
segments of the tract passing through the body are, 
in order beginning at the mouth, the oral cavity, 
pharynx (throat), esophagus, stomach, small 
intestine, large intestine (colon), rectum and 
anus.  Accessory organs associated with the GI 
tract include the salivary glands, teeth, tongue, 
liver, gallbladder and pancreas. 
 Foods taken into the body must be broken 
down: proteins into amino acids, fats into fatty 
acids and glycerol, and complex carbohydrates into 
simple sugars.  This is digestion.  The breakdown 
products must then be transferred into the blood.  
This is absorption.  That which is not absorbed is 
processed for defecation. 
INTESTINAL BLOOD FLOW 
 In the abdominal region, a long sheet of 
membranous tissue spreads out from its attachment 
at the posterior abdominal wall.  It then fans out and 
the other end is attached to one edge of the entire 
length of the intestines.  This membranous web, 
called the mesentery, supports all of the blood 
vessels, lymphatic vessels and nerves that extend to 
the intestines.  Blood low in nutrients is carried to 
the intestines through the mesenteric arteries that 
branch directly off the abdominal aorta.  Intestinal 
capillary beds, described later, receive nutrients 
absorbed from the gut and transport them throug h 
mesenteric veins to the hepatic portal vein that 
carries blood into the liver.  In the liver, another 
capillary network provides for the extraction and 
processing of nutrients and removal of any bacteria 
or contaminants that might have been absorbed. 
Blood from the liver containing the processed 
nutrients is transported into the inferior vena cava 
by the hepatic vein .  Thus, the arterial blood 
carried to the gut is passed through two capillary 
beds before returning to the heart. A system a veins 
that connect two capillary beds is referred to as a 
portal system. 
THE ORAL CAVITY 
 Digestion begins as food enters the oral 
cavity (mouth). Teeth begin the mechanical 
digestion of food. Tooth development occurs in two 
stages.  First, 20 deciduous or baby teeth eru pt.  
They are later replaced by the 32 permanent teeth-
eight in each quadrant.  In each quadrant, beginning 
at the front and moving back, there are 2  incisors, 
the cutting teeth; 1 cuspid or canine, the tearing 
teeth; 2 premolars or bicuspids, the grinding teeth; 
and 3 molars or tricuspids, also for grinding.  The 
last molar in each quadrant is the wisdom tooth.  
There are no deciduous molars; molars erupt only 
once as permanent teeth. 
 Chemical digestion begins as saliva is 
mixed with the food.  Saliva is  secreted by three 
pairs of exocrine salivary glands: the parotid 
glands, in each cheek below and anterior to the 
ears; the submandibular glands in the posterior 
lower jaw; and the sublingual glands  in the 
anterior part of the lower jaw  under the tongue .  
Saliva enters the oral cavity through salivary ducts. 
It contains water, salts and significant amounts of 
salivary amylase, an enzyme  that breakdowns the 
complex carbohydrate  called starch i nto the 
disaccharides called maltose.  Saliva secretion is 
under n eural control. The parasympathetic 
nervous system increases flow, the sympathetic 
decreases flow. 
 The tongue helps to position food in the 
oral cavity for chewing and swallowing. Taste 
buds on the surface of the tongue function as 
chemoreceptors, helping us to identify the nature of 
substances we are taking into the mouth. 
THE ESOPHAGUS 
 From the oral cavity, food moves into the 
pharynx or throat, where voluntary muscles pass it 
into the esophagus by means of the swallowing 
reflex.  The esophagus connects the pharynx to the 
stomach.  It is about ten inches in length  and runs 
posterior to the heart and trachea along the dorsal 
wall of the thoracic cavity. From the esophagus 
down, the digestive tract has a similar pattern of 
layering in all segments.  The inn er lining of the 
tract is mucous membrane (mucosa).  Next is a 
layer of submucosal tissue containing blood and 
lymph vessels and nerves.  Then there are the 
visceral muscle layers.  The inner layer is a circular 
layer and the outer layer runs longitudinall y.  
Finally, the outer tissue layer is the fibroserous 
layer or serosa. The only secretion of the 
esophagus is mucus.  It functions in protecting and

===== PAGE 83 =====
79 
 
lubricating the inner mucosal tissues of the 
esophagus.   
PERISTALSIS 
 The movement of food downward towar d 
the stomach and then on through the rest of the 
digestive tract is caused by waves of muscle 
contractions referred to as peristaltic contractions.  
A ring of smooth muscle circling the tube constricts 
and the constriction is moved forward, squeezing 
the contents of the tube ahead of it. In the gut, the 
waves of peristalsis move from the oral end toward 
the anal end.  Peristaltic waves of contraction are 
used to move material through many other smooth 
muscle tubes of the body as well.  Peristalsis is 
stimulated by parasympathetic nerve impulses 
initiated by distension of the gut with food. But 
visceral muscle can contract without nerve 
stimulation. As the tension in the wall of the 
intestine increases to a certain limit, the muscle 
spontaneously contracts, displacing the food 
downstream and thereby relieving the tension. 
 Multiple rings of muscle sometimes 
contract simultaneously, helping mix the contents 
with digestive juices. These back-and-forth 
contractions are called segmentation contractions.   
THE STOMACH 
 The stomach occupies the upper left 
portion of the abdominal cavity.  The four regions 
of the stomach, shown in the figure, are the cardia, 
the fundus, the body and the antrum. The stomach 
wall has the same basic layers described above 
(mucosa, submucosa, muscular layers, serosa) but 
there are differences in the structure of the layers.  
For example, there is a third inner oblique muscle 
layer below the circular and longitudinal.  The 
mucosa has three types of glandular cells.  Besides 
the goblet cells that secrete mucus, there are also 
parietal cells that secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl) 
and peptic cells that secrete a digestive precursor 
enzyme called pepsinogen. The role of these 
secretions is discussed below. 
 As food is deposited in the stomach, th e 
stomach is able to distend.  This is possible because 
the walls of the empty stomach form thick folds 
called rugae.  Also, the stomach muscles reflexly 
relax to allow distension as food enters.  Under 
neural and endocrine control, the stomach can act 
as both a digestive organ and a food storage organ.   
The functions of the stomach are: 
 storage of partially digested food (now called 
chyme) 
 secretion of gastric juices by the glandular cells 
 mixing of food by the three muscular layers 
 secretion of intrinsic factor required for vitamin 
B-12 absorption 
 some absorption of water, alcohol, fat soluble 
drugs and vitamins 
 secretion of the hormone gastrin 
 partial digestion of proteins.                  
 The processes of gastric (stomach) 
digestion has been divided into three phases:  
   The Cephalic Phase.  This phase is reflexly 
initiated by the sight and smell of good food.  
Parasympathetic (vagus nerves) impulses sent to 
the stomach prepare it for the food's arrival by 
stimulating secretory activity and muscle 
contractions even before the food has entered.  
Thus it is important to have food that looks, 
tastes and smells good. 
 The Gastric Phase.  The presence of food in the 
stomach initiates this phase.  The lower region 
of the stomach secretes the hormone gastrin into 
the blood.  When the blood containing gastrin 
reaches the fundus and body of the stomach, it 
causes secretion of gastric juices.  Parietal cells 
secrete hydrochloric acid (HCl). HCl secretion is 
mediated by histamine, released from the 
stomach lining. Peptic cells secrete pepsinogen.  
In the acidic environment provided by HCl, 
pepsinogen is converted to the enzyme pepsin 
that acts by breaking large proteins into small 
protein fragments.  Digestion of the stomach 
mucosa itself is prevented by the mucus 
secretions of goblet cells.  Digestive activity of 
the stomach is facilitated by churning and 
mixing caused by stomach muscle contractions.

===== PAGE 84 =====
80 
 
 The Intestinal Phase.  Chyme entering the small 
intestine stimulates it to release the hormone 
cholecystokinin. Besides exerting control on the 
pancreas and gallbladder, cholecystokinin 
inhibits gastric digestion in the stomach. In 
effect, the intestines are signaling the stomach to 
stop digesting and begin storing chyme until the 
intestines are finished processing th e newly 
arrived material. Also, distension of the small 
intestine produces an enterogastric nerve reflex 
that reduces gastric activity by inhibition of the 
parasympathetic nerves to the stomach.  
 Emptying of the stomach is controlled by 
the pyloric sphincter muscle located between the 
stomach and small intestine. 
THE SMALL INTESTINE 
 The small intestine is found folded in the 
abdominal cavity below the liver and stomach.  In 
life (with muscle tone) it is probably 10 to 12 feet 
long. The first portion of th e small intestine is the 
"C" shaped duodenum.  It's less than a foot in 
length.  Next is the jejunum making up about 2/5 
of the remaining length of the small intestine.  Last 
is the ileum.  There is no apparent anatomical 
division between the jejunum and i leum, but on 
close examination, the jejunum has a thicker and 
more vascular wall.   
 The inner layer of the small intestine 
(mucosa) is very velvety in appearance because of 
the millions of finger -like projections called villi 
that line the inner wall.  These projections increase 
the surface area of the small intestine for more 
efficient absorption of nutrients.  Below the mucosa 
is a submucosal layer with blood vessels and lymph 
vessels to transport absorbed nutrients through the 
circulation.  Next are the smooth muscle layers, an 
inner circular and outer longitudinal layer.  These 
muscles move the chyme through the intestinal tract 
by peristaltic contractions  and mix with 
segmentation contractions.  The outer supporting 
layer of the small intestine is the serosa, part of the 
serous membrane system of the abdominal cavity.  
The functions of the small intestine include: 
 completing the process of digestion 
 absorbing products of digestion into the blood 
 secreting necessary hormones and enzymes. 
 In the small intestine, pancreatic juices, bile 
and intestinal secretions all help to bring digestion 
to completion. Some of the digestive juices are 
produced by the exocrine portion of the pancreas.  
The pancreas is a flat, glandular organ located 
below the stomach.  Pa ncreatic juices are of two 
types. The first is a watery type rich in 
bicarbonate ions that neutralizes the acidic chyme 
entering the duodenum.  When acidic chyme enters 
the duodenum, the duodenum releases the hormone 
secretin into the blood.  When the horm one 
secretin reaches the pancreas, the release of the 
watery juice is stimulated.  The juice is carried to 
the duodenum through the pancreatic duct, where 
it neutralizes the stomach acid. 
  The second type of pancreatic juice is an 
enzyme rich mixture.  Ch yme entering the small 
intestine stimulates the duodenum to release the 
hormone cholecystokinin.  In turn, this hormone 
stimulates the pancreas to release enzymes into the 
duodenum through the pancreatic duct.  Digestive 
enzymes are also secreted by the in testinal mucosa 
itself. The enzymes include amylase for digestion 
of starch to the maltose and the enzymes sucrase, 
maltase and lactase that convert the se 
disaccharides to the monosaccharides of glucose, 
fructose, and galactose.   
 Also secreted are proteases including 
trypsin, chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidase, to 
complete the digestion of peptides entering from the 
stomach and lipase that digests emulsified fat to 
fatty acid and glycerol.   
 Fat digestion is facilitated by 
emulsification with bile. Bile is produced by the 
liver and stored in the gallbladder.  The liver 
occupies the upper right side of the abdominal 
cavity and the gallbladder is found on the liver's 
inferior surface. Bile salts and lecithin in bile act to 
emulsify fats, that is, break them down into tiny fat 
droplets.  In this way, the surface area of the fat 
globules is greatly increased making the fat more 
accessible to lipase. This increases the efficiency of 
fat digestion.  The hormones of the duodenum 
described above are also important in controlling 
bile.  Secretin stimulates the liver to produce bile 
from the steroid molecule cholesterol.  Some to the 
bile produced enters the gallbladder where it is 
concentrated and stored. The hormone 
cholecystokinin causes the gallbladder to contract, 
releasing the stored bile into the duodenum.

===== PAGE 85 =====
81 
 
LESSON 27:  ABSORPTION OF NUTRIENTS  
 
 The inner surface of the small intestine has 
millions of small finger-like projections called villi. 
 The villi increase the surface area for absorption by 
about ten times.  In addition, the outer surface of 
each villus is covered with single layer of columnar 
epithelial cells, and the cell membrane at the upper 
surface of the cell has projections called microvilli. 
The villi and microvilli together increase the 
surface area for absorption by at least 500 times.  A 
section through a villus with the associated blood 
and lymph vessels is shown below.   
 The six basic nutrients absorbed from the 
diet are carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, 
minerals, and water.    
 Minerals include positively charges 
electrolytes like sodium, iron, potassium, calcium 
and magnesium that are all actively transported into 
the capillaries of the villi.  Sodium ion, for 
example, diffuses across the microvilli of the 
epithelial cells lining the small intestine and is then 
actively transported out of the opposite side of the 
cell into the interstitial fluid and blood of the 
capillaries. The hormone aldosterone that 
increased sodium reabsorption in the kidney tubules 
also increases sod ium absorption from the gut.  
Negatively charged ions like chloride ion, are 
absorbed along with the positive ions by attraction 
to the opposite charge.  Ions with a single positive 
charge like sodium ions are more easily absorbed 
than ions with a double positive charge like calcium 
ions or magnesium ions.  Calcium absorption does 
occur more efficiently when vitamin D is available, 
however.  Even so, about 50 times more sodium ion 
is absorbed than calcium ion.  Fortunately, the 
nutritional requirement for divalent ions is not very 
great.  These are just some of the many vital 
minerals absorbed from the intestinal tract each 
day. 
 Carbohydrates are broken down into 
monosaccharides (simple sugars) prior to 
absorption.  The monosaccharides glucose 
(dextrose) and galactose are absorbed into the villi 
by secondary active transport, also called co-
transport.  A sugar and sodium molecule bind 
simultaneously to the carrier protein through which 
sodium diffuses into the cell and the sugar follows 
by co-transport.  Exp enditure of ATP moves the 
sodium ion from the epithelial cell to the interstitial 
space as described above, reestablishing the sodium 
gradient and allowing another sodium and sugar to 
enter. Thus, s ugar can be transported against the 
concentration gradient using sodium transport as 
the source of energy.  The sugar moves out of the 
epithelial cell by facilitated diffusion and enters the 
interstitial fluid and plasma.  Fructose is absorbed 
by facilitated diffusion.  That is, while a carrier is 
required, ATP and sodium transport are not.  
Fructose cannot be carried against a concentration 
gradient.  Of the three major monosaccharides 
transported, galactose is most easily absorbed, then 
glucose and then fructose.  The simple sugars enter 
the capillaries of the villi and are then transported 
by the portal vein to the liver.  In the liver, fructose 
and galactose are converted to glucose and stored. 
 Proteins are digested to tri -peptides, di -
peptides or single amino acids that are then 
absorbed by active transport into the villi.  Most 
peptides are absorbed using the sodium ion co -
transport mechanism described above.  Some are 
absorbed by facilitated diffusion.  The uptake of 
amino acids is very efficient.  Most amino acids are 
already absorbed in the first half of t he small 
intestine.  Because of different binding 
characteristics of the amino acids, at least five

===== PAGE 86 =====
82 
 
different binding proteins have been identified in 
the cell membrane of intestinal endothelial cells.  
The amino acids enter the villi capillaries and move 
to the liver through the portal vein. 
 Fats are absorbed as fatty acids  and 
glycerol.  Bile salts that emulsified the fat, 
facilitating digestion, combine with the fatty acids 
and glycerol forming micelles.  This makes fatty 
acids and glycerol soluble in c hyme.  The micelles 
move toward the epithelial cells where the fatty 
acids and glycerol move by diffusion (not active 
transport) through the lipid membranes into the 
epithelial cells of the villi.  The bile remains behind 
to form more micelles.  Within the  epithelial cells, 
fatty acids and glycerol recombine into fat 
molecules and form small fat globules.  Then a 
protein covering forms around the globule.  This 
protein coated fat globule is called a chylomicron.  
The chylomicrons that then leave the endothe lial 
cells are too large to be absorbed into the capillaries 
and so they diffuse into the lymph by way of the 
more permeable central lacteals.  From there they 
move through the lymphatic system entering the 
blood through the thoracic duct in the neck region.   
 Water is absorbed by osmosis.  As other 
nutrients are absorbed, the interstitial fluids and 
capillary plasma become hyperosmotic and the high 
osmotic pressure (pulling force) draws water out of 
the intestines and into the blood. 
 Vitamins are absorbed by diffusion.  Fat 
soluble vitamins (including vitamins A,D,E, and K) 
are absorbed along with fats.  In fact, after a 
cholecystectomy (gallbladder removal), the less 
efficient absorption of fats often leads to 
deficiencies in the fat-soluble vitamins. 
THE LARGE INTESTINE 
 Chyme passes from the ileum into the first 
segment of the large intestine, called the cecum, 
through the ileocecal valve.  The large intestine, or 
colon, is about 5 feet long.  The segments of the 
colon are illustrated below.  Note the narrow 
extension of the cecum called the vermiform 
(worm-like) appendix, a vestigial organ associated 
with the lymphatic system. From the cecum, 
material moves upward on the right side of the 
abdominal cavity through the ascending colon, 
across the upper part of the abdominal cavity from 
right to left through the transverse colon, down the 
left side of the abdominal cavity through the 
descending colon and back to the midline through 
the sigmoid colon.  The last 8 or so inches of the 
gut is called the rectum and, below it, the anal 
canal opens to the outside.    The muscle layers of 
the colon include inner circular and outer 
longitudinal muscles.  The longitudinal muscles are 
not complete, but form three thick bands called the 
taeniae coli .  Tonic contraction  to these bands 
produce characteristic bulges called the haustra in 
the wall of the colon. 
 The only secretion of the epithelial cells 
lining the colon is mucus.  The mucus lubricates 
the walls of the colon, protects the walls from 
harmful bacterial metabolic by-products and helps 
hold the feces together.  
 Within the colon, bacterial action converts 
the remaining chyme to fecal material.  Absorption 
from the colon is limited mainly to water, some 
electrolytes and vitamins.  Significant amounts of 
sodium an d chloride ions are absorbed from the 
colon.  Water is the absorbed along with the 
electrolytes by osmosis.  The water reabsorption is 
important in determining the final consistency to 
the fecal material.  Too much reabsorption and the 
stool is too firm, leading to constipation. Too little 
water reabsorption and the stool is too watery, 
causing diarrhea.  Although retention of feces in 
constipation is uncomfortable, the potential for 
dehydration makes diarrhea far more dangerous.  
The total daily dietary water intake from solid food 
and liquid is normally about 1.5 liters.  Another 7 
liters is secreted into the digestive tract as mucus, 
saliva and other digestive juices.  Most of this fluid 
volume is reabsorbed in the small intestine.  Only 
about 200 ml enters the colon.  About half of that is 
reabsorbed and the rest excreted with the feces. 
 In the process of metabolizing the colonic 
contents, colonic bacteria produce several important 
vitamins including several B vitamins and vitamin 
K.   The vitamins are then absorbed into the blood.  
Vitamin deficiencies often result when colonic 
bacterial production is inhibited.   Newborns, who

===== PAGE 87 =====
83 
 
have not yet developed a bacterial flora, are at 
higher risk for vitamin deficiency. 
THE LIVER 
 Besides its role in the process of digestion 
and absorption of nutrients associated with the 
digestive system, already discussed, the liver is 
involved with vascular and metabolic functions that 
impact on every other organ system. 
 Vascular Functions . The liver is an 
expansible organ abl e to serve as a blood storage 
area.  Normally, about 10% of the blood volume is 
found in the liver, but the capacity can increase to 
accommodate nearly 30% of the blood volume 
when necessary.  In addition, because the veins in 
the hepatic sinuses are so permeable, nearly half the 
circulating lymph is produced in the liver.  In fact, 
an increase in hepatic venous (outflow) pressure of 
as little as 3 mmHg above normal can cause the 
liver to literally sweat fluid that fills the abdominal 
cavity- a condition called ascites.   
      In the process of absorption from the small 
intestine, it is normal for significant numbers of 
bacteria to be absorbed into the intestinal 
capillaries.  Recall that intestinal blood is 
transported to the liver capillaries through the portal 
vein before being returned to the heart.  In the liver 
sinuses, phagocytes engulf nearly all bacterial cells, 
cleansing the blood before passing it to the hepatic 
vein. 
 Metabolic Functions. The liver buffers the 
blood concentration of glucose.  At mealtime, the 
liver converts excess glucose to glycogen, a 
complex carbohydrate for storage.  (Muscle cells 
are also able to produce glycogen for storage).  This 
process is called glycogenesis and is stimulated by 
the hormone insulin. In addition, excess 
carbohydrate can be converted to fat in the liver and 
then transported to adipose cells for storage.  
Between meals, glycogen is converted back to 
glucose as needed in the process of glycogenolysis. 
The hormone glucagon stimulates this process. In 
addition, if stores of glucose are insufficient to meet 
between meal demands, liver enzymes are actually 
able to convert amino acids or fats to glucose, a 
process called gluconeogenesis.  The hormone 
cortisol initiates this reaction.  The ammonia 
residue left over from amino acid deamination is 
detoxified in the liver by conversion to urea that is 
passed to the kidney for excretion.  This is just one 
example of the liver's ability to break down and 
detoxify many blood borne wastes, hormones and 
drugs. In the liver, deteriorating red blood cells are 
broken down.  The iron from hemoglobin is stored 
while the toxic hemoglobin pigment, bilirubin, is 
passed into the bile for excretion. 
 Besides glycogen and iron, the liver stores 
many other substrates required to maintain  
homeostasis. Vitamins included are A, B-12, and D. 
  Nearly 90% of the plasma proteins are 
produced by the liver.  These include the clotting 
proteins prothrombin and fibrinogen, the vasoactive 
precursor angiotensinogen and the most abundant 
plasma protein, albumin. 
 The liver is also an endocrine gland, 
secreting the hormone somatomedin that mediates 
many of the effects of growth hormone and 
erythropoietin, needed to promote erythrocyte 
production. 
VITAMINS AND MINERALS 
  Below is a table containing a par tial list of 
vitamins and minerals and some of their important 
functions- functions described previously in 
discussions of other organ systems.  
Vitamin Function  
A Production of visual pigments, 
development of bones and teeth 
D Absorption of calcium ions from the 
intestines 
K Production of blood clotting proteins 
E Antioxidant, may maintain stability of cell 
membranes 
B12 Synthesis of nucleic acids and myelin 
C Collagen production, synthesis of steroid 
hormones 
Mineral Function 
Calcium  Blood clotting, nerve conduction, muscle 
contraction, bones, teeth 
Phosphorus Found in DNA, RNA, ATP, phospholipids, 
bones 
Potassium Intracellular ion for nerve impulse 
conduction 
Sodium Extracellular ion for nerve impulse 
conduction, regulate water movement 
Iron Binding site for oxygen on hemoglobin 
Iodine Production of thyroid hormones that 
control metabolic rate 
Sulfur Structural component of some amino 
acids 
Chlorine Synthesis of stomach acid

===== PAGE 88 =====
84 
ENDOCRINE FUNCTION OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT 
 
 Along with their other digestive functions, the stomach and duodenum are endocrine glands.  Under the appropriate stimulus, they 
produce hormones that are released into the blood, carried to the target organ (organ with receptors for that particular hormone), and 
produce the desired effect.  The important GI hormones involved in the processes of digestion are summarized below.  Note that some 
hormones have multiple targets. 
 
HORMONE SOURCE STIMULUS FOR 
RELEASE 
TARGET ORGAN EFFECT 
     
Gastrin Antrum of the 
stomach 
Food entering the 
stomach 
Stomach body and 
fundus 
Stimulate secretion of pepsinogen and 
hydrochloric acid. 
     
Cholecystokinin Duodenum Chyme entering the 
duodenum 
Stomach body and 
fundus 
Inhibit secretion of pepsinogen and HCl. 
   Exocrine pancreas Release enzyme rich juices into duodenum 
via pancreatic duct. 
   Gallbladder Release bile into the duodenum via cystic and 
common bile duct. 
   Brain Suppresses appetite 
     
Secretin Duodenum Chyme entering 
duodenum 
Exocrine pancreas Release watery juices rich in bicarbonate via 
pancreatic duct. 
   Liver Stimulate production of bile. 
     
Insulin Pancreas High blood sugar Liver Stimulate glycogenesis- the synthesis of 
glycogen for storage in the liver 
     
Glucagon Pancreas Low blood sugar Liver Stimulate glycogenolysis- the break down of 
stored glycogen to glucose 
     
Cortisol Adrenal cortex Stress, pituitary ACTH Liver Stimulate gluconeogenesis- the synthesis of 
glucose from amino acids and fats 
     
Ghrelin Stomach  Fasting Brain Stimulate appetite

===== PAGE 89 =====
85 
LESSON 28:  DIGESTIVE WASTES
 
COLONIC MOTILITY 
 Movement of material through the colon is 
somewhat different than in the small intestine.   
Modified weak but continuous contractions of the 
taeniae coli muscles in the ascending colon 
gradually move the forming fecal material toward 
the transverse colon for storage.  The slow process 
can take 8 hours or more.  From the transverse 
colon onward, the muscles are inactive most of the 
time.  But two or three times a day, especially after 
a meal, mass contractions of long segments of the 
smooth muscle occur, first at the transverse colon, 
then farther on down.  These mass contractions 
force the fecal material into the rectum for 
defecation.  Distension of the rectum by fecal 
material initiates the autonomic defecation reflex.  
Mass contractions along with contraction of the 
abdominal muscles and stiffening of the diaphragm 
by breath holding all contribute to the mass 
movement of fecal material.  The outflow from the 
colon is controlled by an intern al and external 
sphincter muscle . The timing of d efecation can 
normally be controlled because the external 
sphincter muscle is voluntary  skeletal muscle.  If 
postponed, material moves back into the sigmoid 
colon and is retained until the next stimulus. 
FECES 
 The average American adult passes about 
130 grams of digestive waste (called feces) each 
day.  The amount is dependent on the type of diet.  
Persons on a vegetarian diet produce significantly 
more.  Plant materials contain large amounts of 
roughage, ma inly in the form of cellulose that 
cannot be digested or absorbed by humans. 
Approximately 75% of the stool is water (about 100 
ml).  Of the dry weight, about 30% is dead bacteria, 
30% roughage indigestible by the human digestive 
system, some fat and a lit tle protein produced by 
the colonic bacteria, and some minerals and 
electrolytes.  Pigments from blood cells broken 
down in the liver and deposited into the small 
intestine along with the bile gives the fecal material 
a golden brown color.  Obstruction of the bile ducts 
would give the feces a slate gray color.   
Fecal consistency of feces depends on 
water content.  Normally, the feces should have the 
consistency of a ripe banana.  If too much water 
remains, diarrhea (literally "flow-through") results. 
Too little water in the feces leads to constipation. 
FLATUS 
 On the average, there is about 150 ml of 
gas, called flatus, in the gastrointestinal tract.  
About a third of that amount is in the stomach; 
mostly swallowed air.  Stomach flatus is primarily 
nitrogen and oxygen.  It is released by eructation 
(belching), absorbed into the blood, or passed on to 
the small intestine.  The back -and-forth motion of 
gas in the pylorus of the stomach and its passage 
through the pyloric sphincter causes gushing sounds 
called borborygmi. 
 Very little gas is normally found in the 
small intestine.  The little that is present produces 
the soft rumbles heard through the abdominal wall 
and are an sign of an active healthy bowel.  Because 
of the large surface area available in the sm all 
intestine, most gas is rapidly absorbed into the 
blood.  Any that might remain would be passed on 
to the colon. 
 About two-thirds of the flatus is found in 
the colon; most of it produced by the colonic 
bacteria in the process of metabolizing digestive 
wastes.  Gases produced include oxygen, nitrogen, 
carbon dioxide, methane, hydrogen and hydrogen 
sulfide.  The combination of these last three gases 
means that colonic gas is not only potentially 
flammable, but explosive as well.  Rare cases of 
colonic gas explosions resulting in serious injury 
have been reported.   
The amount and composition of colonic gas 
depends on the substrates provided to the bacterial 
flora.  Beans and other legumes, for example, 
provide large quantities of oligosaccharides that are 
rapidly metabolized by bacteria yielding significant 
amounts of carbon dioxide gas. 
 The odor of fecal material and colonic 
flatus is due to pungent indole, skatole and thiole 
compounds produced by bacterial action.  The 
thioles, for example, are compounds containing the 
sulfhydryl group (SH-).  Several common examples 
of thiole compounds are: 
 Hydrogen sulfide (H2S), released from rotting 
eggs.

===== PAGE 90 =====
86 
 Methyl mercaptan (CH3-HS), added to odorless 
natural gas as a warning. 
 Butyl mercaptan (CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-HS), 
component of skunk odorant. 
 Much of the colonic flatus is absorbed.  
Fortunately, the liver metabolizes the foul smelling 
compounds so the odors don't volatilize into expired 
gas.  That which is not absorbed is transmitted to 
the rectum and through the anus.  For this, intra -
abdominal pressure is increased to raise the 
pressure in the rectum.  Gas is expelled through the 
voluntarily contracted external anal sphincter 
providing a slit too narrow for solid feces to pass.  
As gas is expelled, the folds of anal mus cle may 
vibrate and, based on the same principle used by the 
double-reed bassoon, sound a low-pitched note.  
 The receptors that respond to pressure 
against the anal sphincter are quite sensitive to the 
consistency of material exerting the pressure (as 
you may know from experience).  One is usually 
able to judge whether the material is gaseous (and 
risk passing it directly), liquid (usually requiring 
immediate use of a rest room), or solid (able to be 
expelled with less urgency).  
 Finally, the volume of ga s in the colon is 
dependent on the barometric pressure.  During 
sudden decompression at 40,000 feet, a volume of 
100 ml of colonic gas would suddenly expand to 
between 700 and 800 ml - beyond the capacity of 
the colon.  So next time you fly, "in the event o f 
sudden decompression", donning the oxygen mask 
may not be your only problem. 
CONSTIPATION 
 It's difficult to specify when normal 
variation in frequency, size, and quantity of bowel 
movements becomes abnormal.  While most people 
empty their bowel once a d ay, many perfectly 
healthy people defecate after every meal and others 
only once a week.  Too many people believe that 
one must produce results once a day or be 
overwhelmed by the disaster of irregularity. 
 The symptoms of constipation can include 
mental depression, dull headache, restlessness, loss 
of appetite with or without nausea, abdominal 
distention with heaviness and swelling and foul 
breath.  Treatments include bowel irritants or 
stimulants (castor oil), stool softeners (mineral oil) 
and bulk laxatives (prunes, magnesium salts).  The 
bulk laxatives like milk of magnesia and prunes     
contain magnesium salts. As is the case with 
calcium ion (Ca++), magnesium ion (Mg++), having 
a double positive charge (divalent), is not easily 
absorbed into the blood .  It makes the intestinal 
contents hyperosmotic, tending to pull water into 
the stool by osmosis.  This softens the stool and 
adds to the bulk. 
 Voluntary suppression of the defecation 
reflex may lead to constipation.  The longer the 
feces remain in the c olon, the more time available 
for water reabsorption out of the intestinal tract to 
occur.  If a person routinely fails to defecate when 
the reflex occurs, the reflex becomes progressively 
weaker and the person becomes prone to 
constipation. 
 The symptoms of constipation are not due 
to fecal toxins entering the blood.  If the liver is 
healthy, any toxins will be metabolized.  Many 
animals in fact, ingest their feces.  For them, some 
nutrients that could not be digested on first pass can 
be digested on secon d pass after the colonic 
bacteria have worked on them.  The symptoms of 
constipation are related to the presence of bulk in 
the colon.  They can be duplicated by distending the 
colon with an inflated balloon or cotton.  There are 
numerous accounts of peopl e who have retained 
enormous masses of feces for months without 
suffering any serious effects other than the burden 
of carrying a colon ic content of 60-100 pounds of 
fecaliths.  The condition is called megacolon. 
 Once constipation has been relieved by a 
bowel movement, the symptoms of constipation 
disappear almost immediately.  This also argues 
against toxins as the cause of the symptoms.  If 
toxins were involved, it would take much more time 
for them to be cleared from the system. 
 A much more serious pro blem is diarrhea 
that can potentially lead to severe dehydration and 
loss of blood pressure.

===== PAGE 91 =====
87 
LESSON 29: METABOLIC PATHWAYS 
 
The two basic components of metabolism 
are shown in the figure below.  The first is 
anabolism, the process of forming large molecules 
from smaller ones.  The example shown is the 
synthesis of large protein molecules from individual 
amino acids.  Protein synthesis is regulated by DNA 
segments called genes that code of a strand of 
messenger RNA. The RNA is used to ensure the 
proper alignment of amino acids i n a given strand 
of protein. The process requires energy in the form 
of ATP.  
The second process is catabolism, 
breaking down large molecules into smaller ones. 
An example is the digestion of large complex 
carbohydrates, for exampl e breaking down large 
starch molecules into glucose. Ca rbohydrate 
catabolism doesn't end with glucose. In this lesson 
we'll quickly review how glucose enters cells and, 
in combination with O 2, is further catabolized to 
CO2 and H 2O for the purpose of provid ing 
sufficient energy to synthesize ATP from ADP plus 
inorganic phosphate (P i).  The series of chemical 
reactions in the catabolism process are all carefully 
controlled in step-wise fashion involving series of 
specific enzymes.  
A byproduct of the chemical  pathways 
described above is heat production. Most of the 
energy derived from the catabolism of glucose is in 
the form of hear. So we must also consider how the 
body regulates temperature, faced with both 
internal and external thermal stresses.  
 The rela tionship between anabolism and 
catabolism for the two examples given is shown in 
the figure. Protein synthesis requires ATP drrived 
from the catabolism of glucose.  But the catabolism 
of glucose cannot occur without protein enzymes.  
It's a chicken and egg problem! 
 The catabolism of glucose links the 
digestive system that provides the fuel (g lucose) 
and the respiratory system that provides the oxygen 
needed for the complete oxidation of glucose and 
eliminates the carbon dioxide waste produced.   
Conversion of glucose and oxygen to 
carbon dioxide and water involves three processes: 
glycolysis, the citric acid cycle , and the electron 
transport system. 
GLYCOLYSIS: 
1 GLUCOSE  2 PYRUVIC ACID + 4 H+ + 4 e- 
Energy: 2 ADP + 2 Pi  2 ATP 
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the 
cell and does not require oxygen.  The stepwise 
conversion of a 6 -carbon glucose molecule to two 
3-carbon pyruvic acid molecules involves step-wise 
production of intermediates. Production of each is 
controlled by a unique enzyme.  As the rea ctions 
proceed, there is a net production of two ATP 
molecules per glucose molecule. The overall 
reaction is summarized above.  The electrons and 
hydrogen ions produced will be important in the 
last phase of glucose catabolism, the electron 
transport system. 
 The process of 
glycolysis occurs in several 
stages: 
 Phosphorylation. A 
phosphate molecule is 
added to glucose to 
maintain the 
concentration gradient 
for glucose uptake and 
trap glucose within the 
cell. 
 Priming. A second 
phosphate is added to 
create an i somer- two 
halves of the molecule

===== PAGE 92 =====
88 
are mirror images of eachother. 
 Cleavage. The 6 -carbon molecule is split 
creating two identical 3-carbon molecules. 
 Oxidation. The 3 -carbon molecules are 
oxidized with electrons transferred to the 
oxidizing agent, NAD+ (nicotinomide adenine 
dinucleotide). 
 Dephosphorylation. The transfer of phosphate 
from the glucose metabolites to ADP, forming 
ATP and the final product, two pyruvic acids. 
If sufficient oxygen is available, the pyruvic acid 
produced enters the mitochondria and the next stage 
of metabolism begins.  If there is not sufficient 
oxygen, pyruvic acid is converted to lactic acid that 
accumulates in the tissues causing a local acidosis.  
The low tissue pH contributes to the pain associated 
with muscle fatigue.  With oxygen, the pyruvic acid 
continues on to enter the mitochondria where 
oxygen-requiring ( aerobic) processes are 
responsible for most of the ATP produced from the 
metabolism of glucose. Indeed, without the ATP 
produced from the aerobic processes within the 
mitochondria, life processes would cease. 
THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE: 
2 PYRUVIC ACID  6 CO2 + 20 H+ + 20 e- 
Energy: 2 ADP + 2 Pi  2 ATP 
 The citric acid cycle occurs in the 
mitochondria.   Oxygen is not used in the cycle, 
but if the last phase (the electron tr ansport system) 
is stopped for lack of oxygen, the products of the 
citric acid cycle accumulate and the cycle stops. 
The citric acid cycle begins with the 
combining of a molecule of coenzyme -A (CoA) 
with an acetyl group formed from pyruvic acid. In 
the conversion, a carbon is lost from pyruvic acid 
and forms CO2. The resulting 2-carbon acetyl CoA 
molecules enter the cycle. In the first step, the 2 -
carbon acetyl CoA combines with the 4 -carbon 
end product of the cycle to form the 6 -carbon 
citric acid molecule for which the cycle is named.  
Key events occurring as part of the citric 
acid cycle are: 
 Cleavage of the 3 carbons from the initial 
pyruvic acid molecule. Each carbon is used 
to synthesize a molecule of CO2.    
 Phosphorilation of ADP. For each acetyl -
CoA entering the cycle, a molecule of ATP is 
produced. 
 Oxidation of citric acid cycle substrates. In 
each oxidation step, the electrons removed 
are carried off by the oxidizing agents NAD + 
or FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide). In all, 
ten electrons are obtain ed from each acetyl 
CoA molecule passed through the cycle. 
Again, each reaction in the cycle requires 
its own enzyme, and the enzymes are found in the 
mitochondria.  
The citric acid cycle produces 1 molecule 
of ATP and 3 carbon dioxide molecules per 
molecule of pyruvic acid. A molecule of glucose 
provides two pyruvic acids. Thus, 2 ATP and 6 CO2 
molecules are produced per molecule of glucose. In 
addition, note that more hydrogen ions and 
electrons are generated - a total of 20 each per 
molecule of glucose.  
THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT SYSTEM: 
24 H+ + 24 e- + 6 O2  12 H2O 
Energy: 34 ADP + 34 Pi  34 ATP 
 The electron transport system consists of a 
series of electron carrier enzymes located on the 
inner mitochondrial membranes.  The electrons, 24 
per molecule of glucose, are provided by glycolysis 
and the citric acid cycle and carried to the electron 
transport system by the oxidizing agents mentioned 
above.  Each carrier enzyme accepts an electron 
pair and passes it on to the next carrier.  It can then 
accept another electron pair.  If the next enzyme in 
the series cannot pass its electrons, the cycle stops.  
So it is crucial that the last enzyme carrier in the 
series be able to pass on its electrons.  This is where 
oxygen is used.  The last enzyme in the series 
donates the electrons needed for hydrogen ions and 
oxygen to combine to form water.   As long as 
oxygen is available to act as the final electron 
acceptor, the electrons continue to flow down the 
chain. So besides producing CO 2, mitochondria 
require O2 used to form H2O. 
 In addition to their outer lipid membrane, 
mitochondria have an inner folded membrane 
within which the enzymes needed for the transfer of 
electrons are embedded. As electrons are passed 
from one enzyme to the next, hydrogen ions are 
transported from the central region of the

===== PAGE 93 =====
89 
mitochondria to the region between the inner and 
outer membranes. As the H+ ions accumulate, a 
concentration gradient is created for the diffusion of 
H+ ions back to the central region. To return, the 
H+ ions pass through a p rotein pore with an 
associated ATP-synthase enzyme. Passage of H+ 
ions activates the ATP -synthase that results in the 
production of ATP. In all, up to 34 molecules of 
ADP are converted to ATP for each molecule of the 
original glucose oxidized. The electron  carrier 
system is responsible for most of the ATP produced 
from glucose catabolism, but it can't operate 
without hydrogen ions and electrons supplied by 
way of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle.  And it 
can't function without oxygen from the lungs. 
GLUCOSE METABOLISM SUMMARY: 
1 GLUCOSE + 6 O2  12 H2O + 6 CO2 
Energy: 38 ADP + 38 Pi  38 ATP 
CARBOHYDRATES 
 While carbohydrate has other uses, most 
carbohydrates are converted to glucose and 
oxidized to produce ATP energy as described 
above. Excess glucose can be stored as glycogen in 
muscle and the liver, or it can be converted to fat 
and stored in the liver or in adipose tissue.  If 
insufficient glucose is available, fatty acids , 
glycerol, and deaminated (nitrogen removed) 
amino acids  can enter the pathways  described 
above to produce ATP.  
LIPIDS  
 Lipid molecules include the triglycerides, 
phospholipids and cholesterol.  The most common 
dietary lipid is triglyceride.  It consists of the three-
carbon molecule glycerol with three fatty acid 
chains, one chain bonded to each glycerol carbon.  
The fatty acids are each 12 to 20 carbons in length. 
Triglyceride is used as insulation (subcutaneous fat) 
and for support and protection (fat pads 
surrounding the kidneys). But m ost triglyceride is 
used as fuel for energy.  While most tissues can use 
triglyceride to provide energy, there are some 
exceptions. The brain is an important one. It can 
only use glucose.  
The first step in fat catabolism is hydrolysis 
of triglyceride into glycerol and free fatty acids. 
The hydrolysis products are then carried through 
the blood and taken up as needed by active cells. 
Within the cells, glycerol is converted to glycerol-3-
phosphate and enters the glycolysis pathway at the 
cleavage stage.  
Fatty acids must be transported into the 
mitochondria. There the carbons are broken off in 
pairs to form acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA), the 
molecule that enters the citric acid cycle. The 
process is referred to a beta oxidation because the 
series of reactions leading to formation of acetyl 
CoA require  oxidation of the second or “beta” 
carbon. Beta oxidation provides an additional 
source of hydrogen ions and electrons for the 
electron transport system. The 18-carbon fatty acid 
stearate, for example, provides 146 molecules of 
ATP from the electrons and h ydrogen ions 
generated through beta oxidation and the citric acid 
cycle. 
The liver produces significant quantities of 
acetyl CoA through beta oxidation, especially 
where there is an additional need for energy derived 
from fat. The amount of acetyl CoA is u sually in 
excess of that required by liver cells themselves. 
The excess is transported through the blood to other 
cells. But acetyl CoA is first converted to ketoacids 
for transport. In certain conditions, diabetes 
mellitus for example, the level of ketoacids in blood 
can become high enough to cause ketoacidosis 
leading to suppression of the nervous system and 
even coma.   
 Phospholipids are not used as energy 
sources.  They are formed when one of the three 
fatty acids of the triglyceride is replaced with a  
phosphate group. Phospholipids are important 
structurally. They are abundant in bimolecular 
lipid layer of cell membranes and in nerve tissue 
(the myelin sheath). Cholesterol is not 
metabolized for energy. More than 75% of the 
cholesterol in the body is c onverted to bile in the 
liver.  Significant amounts are found in the outer 
layers of the skin, helping to provide a barrier 
against excessive water loss by evaporation.  
Some cholesterol is also used in the synthesis of 
steroid hormones. 
 Since fat and water don’t mix, lipids would 
condense into large plugs of fat if carried freely 
though the watery body fluids. Therefore, fats are 
transported combined with proteins to form 
lipoproteins. The more protein there is, the higher 
the density of the lipoprotein. Very low density 
lipoproteins (VLDL) have the most fat and

===== PAGE 94 =====
90 
cholesterol. As fats are deposited in adipose tissue, 
the lipoprotein becomes less dense - low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL). High density lipoproteins 
(HDL), with proportionately more protein, 
scavenge cholesterol and carry it to the liver to be 
metabolized. HDLs are therefore, beneficial 
because they lower blood cholesterol. 
PROTEINS 
Proteins are digested to amino acids in the 
gut. Amino acids are absorbed into the blood, 
transported to cells and used to form different 
proteins with amino acid sequences determined by 
messenger RNA derived from DNA genes. Some 
proteins are used structurally, as in collagen of bone 
or actin and myosin of muscle. Some function as 
enzymes, facilitating chemical reactions in the body 
to maintain life functions.  Some are used as  
chemical mediators- certain protein hormones, for 
example. 
Each of the 20 amino acids that form 
proteins can, with the proper enzymes, be converted 
to a substrate in the citric acid cycle.  The first step 
in amino acid conversion is removal of the nitrogen 
containing amine group.  The nitrogen is converted 
to urea and excreted in the urine.  Amino acids can 
be obtained from the diet or taken from tissue 
proteins or enzymes.  If dietary protein is 
insufficient, tissue protein catabolism can exceed 
tissue protein anabolism and the victim enters a 
state of negative nitrogen balance associated with 
starvation.  A positive nitrogen balance means 
anabolism exceeds catabolism, associated with 
youthful growth.  To synthesize proteins, all 
necessary amino acids must be available. The body 
can produce most, but not all, of them. Therefore, 
diet is an essential source of amino acids. Meat 
contains all 20  amino acids . Vegetables do not. 
Therefore, a vegetarian diet sh ould consist of a 
mixture of vegetables to ensure all amino acids are 
included.  
REGULATION OF FOOD INTAKE 
 Consistent with the principle that control of 
functions vital to life originate from lower brain 
centers, control of feeding is centered in the 
hypothalamus. Lateral hypothalamic centers 
stimulate feeding (hunger centers) while more 
medial centers are inhibitory (satiety centers).  
Structures even lower on the brain stem control the 
mechanics of eating; salivation, chewing, 
swallowing.  Higher center s in the cerebral cortex 
can impact appetite as well, since the sight, smell or 
taste of certain consumables can “put you off your 
food”.   
 Regulation of feeding involves both long -
term and short -term mechanisms.  Levels of fat 
storage within the body pro vide long -term 
regulation. When supplies of triglyceride are high, 
feeding centers are suppressed.  A chemical 
mediator called leptin, released from fat cells, is 
involved. Leptin produced in proportion to fat 
reserves acts to suppress appetite. With fat reserves 
elevated, caloric intake can be reduced. 
As we continue eating, our appetite 
disappears more rapidly than the time it takes for 
ingested food to be converted to fat.  So there must 
also be short -term mechanisms to control feeding.  
For this, gastrointestinal distention and secretion of 
certain hormones, including cholecystokinin, have 
both been shown to strongly inhibit feeding centers. 
In addition, studies on subjects with esophageal 
fistulas (opening allowing food in the esophagus to 
pass directly  out of the body) shows that just 
passing food through the mouth eventually 
suppresses appetite.  
The only chemical mediator shown to 
stimulate appetite  is the hormone ghrelin. It is 
produced by the stomach lining and the rate of 
production increases as the stomach empties.

===== PAGE 95 =====
91 
LESSON 30: ENERGETICS AND THERMOREGULATION 
 
ENERGY UNITS 
Energy consumption in the body is 
measured in Calorie units.  A Calorie is equal to 
the energy required to increase the temperature of 
1000 grams of water by 1 o C. (Kilocalorie is more 
correct although Calorie with a capital ‘C’ is used.) 
A gram of carbohydrate or protein provides about 4 
Calories of energy.  A gram of fat provides about 9 
Calories.  Water provides no metabolic energy but 
is usually a significant part of fo ods containing 
carbohydrates and proteins. On the other hand, fat 
and water don’t mix.  So, the pat of butter on a 
baked potato can provide more energy than the 
whole potato itself.  
To meet the minimum energy needs of the 
body, the adult requirement is ap proximately 2400 
Calories per day. Increasing level of activity 
increases the Caloric requirement. Jogging 
consumes about 500 Calories per hour; walking, 
about 200 Calories per hour; watching TV (couch 
potato), about 100 Calories per hour or 2400 
Calories per day. 
If Caloric input exceeds output, we gain 
weight. If output exceeds input, we lose weight. 
THERMOREGULATION 
Body core temperature is normally 
maintained at about 37 o C (98.6 o F).  The core 
temperature refers to the temperature in the interior 
as op posed to the surface skin temperature that 
fluctuates with the environment.   Heat is a by -
product of metabolism.  As with a car engine, when 
the body burns fuel, it provides work energy plus 
heat.  All living cells are constantly consuming a 
basal level of energy that is continuously being 
replaced.  Therefore, a basal level of heat is 
continuously produced by the body.  During 
exercise or under the influence of certain hormones, 
such as those from the adrenal medulla or thyroid 
gland, energy and heat pro duction increase.  The 
body must eliminate any heat in excess of that 
required to keep body temperature normal.   In 
cold conditions, the body can produce needed 
heat by increasing metabolic activity.  
      The body exchanges heat with the 
environment.  U nder normal conditions at room 
temperature, about 60% of excess body heat is 
exchanged by radiation- infrared heat rays 
transmitted by everything in the universe.  A second 
route for heat exchange is conduction- physical 
contact with an object of different  temperature.  
Heat flows from the warmer to the cooler object.  
About 3% of excess heat is exchanged in this way.  
Convection is a special case of conduction where 
heat is conducted to air.  Cool air comes in contact 
with the warm body, picks up heat and rises away 
to be replaced by more cool air.  About 15% excess 
heat is lost in this way.  In hot environments we 
may facilitate this process with a fan.  Finally, 
about 22% of excess heat is lost by evaporation.  
About 600 ml of water evaporates off the ski n and 
out of the lungs each day.  To convert a gram of 
water to water vapor requires 0.58 Calories of heat 
energy, so the body loses about 350 Calories of heat 
per day by evaporation.   
Mechanism Exchange* 
Radiation (infrared waves) 60% 
Conduction (direct contact) 3% 
Convection (air contact) 15% 
Evaporation (of sweat) 22% 
* normal room temperature, at rest 
 The percent heat loss through the different 
mechanisms can change. During exercise, for 
example, the percent heat loss by evaporation of 
sweat increases significantly. Convection becomes 
a serious source of heat loss for exposed flesh on a 
cold and windy day (wind chill factor). 
ADAPTING TO COLD TEMPERATURES 
 In cold weather we use several mechanisms 
to reduce heat loss: 
 Vasoconstriction of peripheral blood vessels in 
the skin keeps more blood (and the heat that it 
contains) in the core of the body.  
 Cold receptors make us uncomfortable so we 
add clothes or crawl under a blanket to better 
insulate the surface.   
 Increasing metabolic heat production p rovides 
additional heat by: 
− increasing muscle activity. Muscle 
contractions, including those that cause 
shivering, produce heat. 
− increasing brown fat  metabolism.  With 
brown fat, production of ATP and heat by 
mitochondria is uncoupled.  Sympathetic 
stimulation causes these mitochondria to

===== PAGE 96 =====
92 
produce heat without ATP.  This is best 
developed in infants. 
− increasing thyroid hormone production.  
Thyroid hormones increase metabolic 
rate.  This adaptation probably requires 
months of continuous cold exposure to 
become effective.     
 Contracting arrector pili muscles of the skin 
provides more insulation for fur bearing animals, 
but in man just causes “goose bumps". 
 The above mechanisms would maintain the 
normal body temperature of someone naked at 
temperatures as low as 55oF.     
ADAPTING TO HOT TEMPERATURES  
 In warm weather we need to eliminate 
excess metabolic heat.  If environmental 
temperature is below body temperature, the 
following mechanisms are effective: 
 Vasodilating peripheral vessels sends heat to the 
surface where it can be transferred to the 
environment. 
 Heat receptors make us uncomfortable so we 
eliminate clothing for better heat exchange with 
the environment.  
 Heat convection can be increased by air 
movement, so we use a fan or find a cool breeze. 
 If the environmental temperature is actually 
higher than core temperature, the above 
mechanisms become ineffective.  The body is now 
gaining more heat by radiation, convection and 
conduction from objects in the environment than it 
is losing by these mechanisms.  There are two 
additional mechanisms that are effective at any 
temperature. 
 Decreasing activity reduces metabolic heat 
production.      
 Producing sweat using sweat glands and then 
evaporating sweat off the surface of the skin 
consumes body heat to provide  the energy 
necessary to convert water from the liquid to gas 
(vapor).  This works best if the air is not already 
saturated with water vapor (with low humidity). 
 Normal core temperature can be maintained in 
temperatures as high as 140oF of dry heat. 
TEMPERATURE CONTROL CENTER 
 The "set -point" for temperature is 
controlled in the hypothalamus of the brain.  
Surface receptors associated with the skin and core 
receptors associated with the spinal cord and 
abdominal viscera sense cold and heat. The core 
temperature will change by 1 degree for every 30 
degrees change in environmental temperature.  The 
gain (correction divided by error) is therefore about 
30, indicating a very efficient hypothalamic control. 
There are separate receptors that respond to heat 
and cold. They are not thought to respond to 
temperature directly, but the changes in metabolic 
rate within the cell that results from the change in 
temperature. That is, heat increases the rate of 
chemical reactions and metabolic rate.  
FEVER 
  Fever induced by bacterial infection is a 
defense mechanism of the body.  This is an 
example of how it's supposed to work:  The core 
temperature is "set" by the hypothalamus.  Certain 
invading bacteria release pyrogens. A pyrogen is 
any molecule that is able to increase the "set point". 
The body raises the temperature to the new "set 
point" by cold adaptation mechanisms described 
above including muscle contractions, the shivers 
that signal fever onset, and “chills” that prompt us 
to bundle up.  The higher temperatures de stroy the 
bacteria and no more pyrogens are released.  
Without pyrogens, the "set point" returns to normal. 
 The body brings temperature back to normal by 
stimulating heat adaptation mechanisms including 
sweat production; a sign that the fever is 
"breaking".   
 While some pyrogens act directly on the 
hypothalamus, others stimulate leukocytes exposed 
to pyrogenic bacteria to release interleukin -1.  
Prostaglandins, local hormone -like mediators, are 
required for this. Interleukin -1 then causes the 
hypothalamus to raise body temperature.  Aspirin 
inhibits prostaglandin and is thus effective in 
lowering body temperature.  Since fever is a 
defense mechanism, preventing it by taking aspirin 
isn't necessarily a good idea  under normal 
circumstances.

===== PAGE 97 =====
93 
LESSON 31:  HORMONE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
The two master control systems of the body 
are the nervous system and endocrine system. In 
the nervous system, discussed earlier, control is 
exerted by rapidly transmitted electrical impulses 
conducted to specific locations by nerve fibers.  In 
the endocrine system, certain glands release 
chemicals called hormones that are carried to 
target organs by the bloodstream and there bind to 
specific receptor sites. Unlike nerve impulses, 
hormones travel more slowly, being limited by the 
flow rate of blood. Hormones produce a more 
generalized effect because, unlike nerve impulses 
that can be targeted to specific synapses, hormones 
stimulate all of its  receptors in contact with the 
blood flow. 
 Endocrine glands are ductless.  Their 
secretions (hormones) are carried by the circulatory 
system.  Exocrine glands, like salivary glands or 
sweat glands, have ducts to carry their secretions to 
the site of action.   
 Hormones are specific substances that are 
secreted by endocrine glands and put into t he 
circulatory system, whereby they go to their site of 
action and produce an effect.  There are two basic 
types of hormones based on chemical structure - 
steroid and non-steroid hormones.  
 Steroid hormones produced in the  reproductive 
organs and adrenal co rtex are synthesized from 
cholesterol.  
 Non-steroid hormones are synthesized from 
amino acids. There are three basic varieties: 
− Amines are modified amino acids. 
Hormones of the thyroid gland and adrenal 
medulla are modifications of the amino 
acid tyrosine. 
− Polypeptides are short chains of amino 
acids, less than ten in length. They include   
hormones synthesized in the hypothalamus. 
− Proteins are longer chains of amino acids. 
Hormones of the pituitary gland and 
pancreas are examples.  
 Steroid hormones act by  entering the cell 
and its nucleus and activating certain genes that in 
turn stimulate production of certain proteins.  These 
proteins then produce the effect. Because of the 
time required for this process to occur, steroid 
hormones are slow acting, requiring 1 or 2 days. 
  Most non-steroid hormones act at the cell 
membrane by activating a second messenger that in 
turn initiates the cascade of reactions leading to the 
desired effect.  In one commonly used pathway, the 
hormone activates an enzyme called adenylate 
cyclase in the cell membrane.  The enzyme 
converts ATP molecules to cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), the second messenger.  
The cAMP triggers a sequence of events leading to 
activation of proteins that lead to the desired effect. 
 Because one m olecule of hormone can activate 
many molecules of the second messenger, with 
further amplification occurring down the cascade, 
the second messenger system amplifies the effect of 
the hormone.  Since non-steroid hormones act at the 
cell membrane, their acti on occurs more quickly 
compared to steroid hormones.  They can produce 
their effect within minutes or hours. 
PROSTAGLANDINS 
     Prostaglandins are chemical mediators 
derived from fatty acids.  They are, in effect, locally 
acting hormones.  Unlike true hor mones that are 
released and carried in the blood to a distant site of 
action, prostaglandins act locally in the same organ 
in which they are produced.  They are produced as 
needed and are rapidly destroyed after use.  
Prostaglandins are found in most organ  systems.  
They may act to cause visceral muscle contractions. 
In blood vessels they may cause vasoconstriction. 
In the uterus, they can cause contractions associated 
with menstrual cramps. Some relax visceral muscle 
and dilate blood vessels. Some stimulate secretion. 
They can cause secretion of some hormones and 
secretion of stomach acid, for example.  Some play 
a role in causing inflammation. Arthritis is an 
example. They are involved in the process of fever. 
The therapeutic effects of aspirin are all rel ated to 
its ability to inhibit the actions of prostaglandins - 
reducing inflammation, fever and pain. 
CONTROL OF OUTPUT 
 For some hormones, control of output is 
straightforward. The endocrine glands that regulate 
blood glucose and calcium levels respond dir ectly 
to concentrations of these molecules in blood. 
 Release of some hormones is stimulated by 
the nervous system. Receptors sensing the need for 
the hormone send sensory impulses to the nervous

===== PAGE 98 =====
94 
system. Form the brain, motor impulses are sent to 
the appropriate gland. (Recall the effectors of the 
nervous system are both muscles and glands). 
 Hormones of the hypothalamus and 
pituitary gland are involved in the control of 
endocrine output as well. The hypothalamus is 
anterior to the upper part of the brain s tem.  The 
pituitary gland is just below it connected by a 
stalk.  The pituitary gland is also referred to as the 
hypophysis.  The posterior portion derived from 
brain tissue is called the neurohypophysis and the 
anterior portion derived from facial tissue is called 
the adenohypophysis.   
The hypothalamus produces  releasing 
hormones and inhibiting hormones that regulate 
the endocrine activity of the anterior pituitary 
gland.  The anterior pituitary hormones, in turn, 
control the endocrine activity of other target 
endocrine glands. For example, thyrotropin 
releasing hormone ( TRH) produced by the 
hypothalamus causes the anterior pituitary to 
release thyroid stimulating hormone ( TSH).  The 
hormone TSH then stimulates the thyroid gland to 
release thyroxine and triiodothyronine.  
Endocrine activity of the adrenal cortex, ovaries 
and testes are similarly controlled, as summarized 
in the table below.  
       Hormone 
release by the target 
gland is controlled by 
a negative feedback 
loop process 
whereby high blood 
levels of the target 
gland hormone act to 
inhibit the production 
of rel easing and 
stimulating hormones 
and levels of the 
target gland hormone are reduced. Low blood 
levels of the target gland hormone act to stimulate 
the production of releasing and stimulating  
hormones. “Negative” simply refers to the change 
in direction. Negative feedback is  an important 
controlling mechanism in the nervous system as 
well. Receptors sense blood pressure is going too 
high and nerves send impulses to make it go back 
down. We'll consider negative feedback control of 
hormones in more detail as we discuss individual 
target glands. Two anterior pituitary hormones, 
growth hormone and prolactin, do not target 
specific endocrine glands.   
ENDOCRINE GLANDS 
 The major hormone producing gl ands and 
organs, and [hormones] produced, are: 
 HYPOTHALAMUS [antidiuretic hormone 
(ADH), oxytocin, releasing/inhibiting hormones] 
 PITUITARY GLAND  
− Anterior [stimulating hormones] 
− Posterior [stores ADH and oxytocin] 
 THYROID GLAND [thyroxine, 
triiodothyronine, calcitonin] 
 PARATHYROID GLANDS [parathyroid 
hormone] 
 ADRENAL GLANDS  
− Cortex [mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids] 
− Medulla [epinephrine, norepinephrine] 
 PANCREAS [insulin, glucagon] 
Other organs and the [hormones] they 
produce, to be described elsewhere along with the 
organ systems of which they are a part, include:  
 OVARIES [estrogens and progesterone] 
 TESTES [testosterone] 
 STOMACH [gastrin, ghrelin] 
 DUODENUM [cholecystokinin, secretin] 
 KIDNEY and LIVER [erythropoietin and 
somatomedin] 
 PLACENTA [estrogens and progesterone] 
 TROPHOBLAST [human chorionic 
gonadotropin]
 
 
HYPOTHALAMUS PITUITARY TARGET GLAND 
TRH Thyrotropin Releasing Hormone  TSH Thyroid Stimulating Hormone  Thyroid gland (thyroxine) 
CRH Corticotropin Releasing Hormone  ACTH Adrenocorticotropic Hormone  Adrenal glands (cortisol) 
 
GnRH Gonadotropin 
                            Releasing Hormone  
 
FSH Follicle Stimulating Hormone  Ovaries (estrogen) 
LH Luteinizing Hormone  Ovaries (progesterone) 
Testes (testosterone)

===== PAGE 99 =====
95 
LESSON 32:  HYPOTHALAMUS, PITUITARY GLAND AND THYROID GLAND 
 
HYPOTHALAMUS 
 Besides the releasing and inhibiting 
hormones, the hypothalamus also produces two 
hormones, ADH and oxytocin, that ar e carried 
through nerve fibers to the posterior pituitary gland 
for storage.   
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and its 
effects on nephrons was discussed previously. It’s 
an example of a hormone controlled by the nervous 
system. If osmoreceptors sense dehydratio n, 
neurally induced ADH release follows. The 
hormone targets the distal convoluted tubules of 
nephrons, opening  the pores and allowing water 
reabsorption from the urine to correct dehydration. 
The other hormone of the hypothalamus 
that is stored in the pit uitary gland is oxytocin.  
Oxytocin has two main functions in females.  It 
stimulates the uterine contractions that occur during 
labor and delivery, and it contracts the ducts in 
mammary tissue during lactation causing milk 
ejection from breast tissue. Lik e ADH, oxytocin 
levels are also controlled by the nervous system. 
Receptors in the uterine cervix are stimulated by 
pressure from the dropping fetus. Sensitive 
receptors at the nipple are stimulated by suckling. 
In both cases , release  of oxytocin follows.  In 
males, oxytocin may promote contractions in the 
reproductive ducts to facilitate ejaculation of 
semen. 
PITUITARY GLAND 
 Besides the stimulating hormones, the 
anterior pituitary gland produces growth hormone 
and prolactin.       
Growth hormone  (GH), a p rotein 
hormone produced by the anterior pituitary, 
stimulates body cells to increase in size and divide 
more rapidly.  The hypothalamus produces growth 
hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) to promote 
GH production by the pituitary.  GH increases the 
rate of am ino acid uptake by cells, increasing the 
rate of protein synthesis.   
Long bones of the body, including those 
of the arms and legs, originally develop as 
cartilage in the fetus. At birth, the cartilage has 
been replaced by bone except at thin disks near 
the top and bottom of each bone. The discs are 
called the epiphyseal discs . These discs persist 
until the late teens or early twenties. As long as 
the discs of cartilage remain, bones can continue 
to elongate and we grow taller. GH increases the 
growth of cartilage in the epiphyseal discs of long 
bones, increasing their rate of elongation.   
A good way to demonstrate the importance 
of a hormone is to observe what happens if levels of 
the hormone become abnormal. Insufficient 
amounts of GH during childhood (pr ior to closure 
of the epiphyseal discs) can result in hypopituitary 
dwarfism.  This is characterized by short stature 
but a body that is still normally proportioned.  The 
effect of too much GH (from an anterior pituitary 
tumor, for example) depends on the state of the 
epiphyseal discs.  Before disk closure, too much 
GH causes gigantism- the individual grows much 
larger than normal.  Height may exceed eight feet. 
But again, the body has normal proportions. After 
closure of the discs , bones can no longer grow  in 
length. Now  excess growth hormone causes 
acromegaly.  Bones grow thicker rather than 
longer. Soft tissue accumulates producing enlarged 
fingers, toes and facial features. The brow and jaw 
protrude and the tongue enlarges.  
Growth hormone causes the liver to release 
a factor called somatomedin that is also necessary 
to promote growth. Even if growth hormone levels 
are normal, lack of somatomedin also results in a 
variety of dwarfism. 
The anterior pituitary also produces 
prolactin, a hormone that stimulat es mammary 
glands to produce milk.  In this case, the dominant 
effect of the hypothalamus seems to be inhibition of 
prolactin secretion.  The hypothalamus releases 
prolactin inhibiting hormone (PIH) to reduce 
prolactin release by the pituitary.  PIH levels fall 
during pregnancy and s hortly after the birth of a 
child, she begins producing breast milk. Prolactin is 
produced in males, though its role is unclear. High 
levels have been shown to cause erectile 
dysfunction and infertility in males. 
 THE THYROID GLAND  
 The thyroid gland is found in the neck on 
the anterior surface of the trachea just below the 
larynx.  It consists of right and left lobes connected

===== PAGE 100 =====
96 
inferiorly by a portion of the gland called the 
isthmus.  Like all endocrine glands, the thyroid has 
a rich blood supply to deliver raw materials for 
hormone production and to transport the hormone 
to the target organ. On the posterior surface of the 
thyroid gland are four small glands called the 
parathyroid glands . Hormones of the thyroid 
gland regulate metabolic rate and hormones of both 
the thyroid and parathyroid glands regulate blood 
calcium levels. 
CONTROL OF METABOLIC RATE 
 The thyroid gland produces the hormones 
thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) that act 
to increase metabolic rate.  Hormones controlling 
metabolic rate are produced in thyroid follicles. 
Follicles are composed of spheres of simple 
cuboidal epithelium filled with a glycoprotein 
substance called the colloid.  The follicular cells 
collect the raw materials required to synthesize 
thyroxine and T3.  These hormones are produced in 
the colloid and stored on large molecules called 
thyroglobulin, to be released from the colloid as 
needed.  TSH (thyroid stimulating hormone) 
stimulates the synthesis of thyroxine and T 3 and 
their release into the blood from the thyroglobulin 
molecules.  The hormone calcitonin, to be 
discussed later, is produced by cells between the 
follicles. 
 The raw materials required for hormone 
production in the follicles are iodine and the amino 
acid tyrosine.  The concen tration of iodine in the 
thyroid gland is as much as 50 times the 
concentration circulating in blood.  Two tyrosine 
molecules combine with three iodine molecules to 
produce the hormone triiodothyronine (T3) and two 
tyrosine molecules combine with four iodi ne 
molecules to produce thyroxine (T4).   
 Once released from the thyroid gland, T 3 
and thyroxine bind to specific plasma proteins for 
transport to the target cells.  At the site of action 
they are released to interact with the cells as free 
hormone. T3 binds less tightly to the protein carrier 
and is thus faster acting than thyroxine.  It is also 
about five times more potent than thyroxine.  On 
the other hand, the effects of thyroxine are longer 
lasting.  About 95% of the circulating hormone 
released from the f ollicles is thyroxine, although 
significant amounts of thyroxine are converted to T3 
in the plasma.  
 Unlike other non-steroid hormones that act 
at the cell membrane, thyroid hormone penetrates 
the cell and cell nucleus much the way steroid 
hormones do. It exerts its effect by activating genes 
associated with the synthesis of enzymes 
responsible for increasing metabolic activity within 
that cell.   
 Blood levels of thyroid hormone are 
controlled by negative feedback. As blood levels 
of the target gland hormone (thyroxine or T3, in this 
case) rise, the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary 
sense that hormone concentration is adequate and 
reduce their output of 
TRH and TSH, slowing 
hormone production in 
the follicles.  Levels of 
thyroid gland hormones 
changing in o ne 
direction feedback to 
cause levels of 
controlling hormones in 
the hypothalamus and 
pituitary to change in the 
opposite direction 
(negative feedback).  If levels of thyroxine and T3 
become too low, the hypothalamus and pituitary 
gland are stimulated to increase output of TRH and 
TSH.  Thus, the hypothalamus and pituitary gland 
stimulate the thyroid gland just enough to produce 
the required amounts of thyroxine and T 3.  A 
similar feedback loop from the adrenal cortex, 
testes and ovaries regulates the levels of the 
releasing and stimulating hormones they require to 
maintain proper levels of their respective hormone 
production. 
 Persons with normal circulating levels of 
thyroxine and T 3 are termed euthyroid.  If levels 
are higher than normal, the condition is te rmed 
hyperthyroidism and if levels are too low, the 
condition is hypothyroidism. Thyroid status can be 
assessed by measuring blood levels of thyroid

===== PAGE 101 =====
97 
hormone or by measuring thyroid uptake of a small 
amount of ingested radioactive iodine. The iodine 
accumulates in the gland allowing the size of the 
gland to be determined by scanning the neck with 
an instrument that detects radioactivity.  If the 
equipment to perform these tests is not available, 
thyroid function can be determined more simply by 
measuring basal metabolic rate ( BMR).  This is a 
measure of the minimum amount of oxygen 
consumption necessary to maintain the body in a 
totally rested condition.  The normal adult value is 
about 250 ml of oxygen per minute .  The fasted 
and resting individual breathes quietly from a 
mixture with a known quantity of oxygen and the 
rate at which the oxygen removed is calculated.  
Hyperthyroid individuals would consume more 
oxygen than normal and hypothyroid individuals 
less than normal.  Some of the features of thyroid 
imbalance are presented in the table below. 
THYROID IMBALANCES 
 Thyroid disease may be caused by a defect 
in the thyroid gland itself (a primary defect), or by 
defects in glands that control thyroid secretion (a 
secondary defect).  For example, hyperthyroidi sm 
may be caused by tumorous growth of the thyroid 
gland, a primary defect, but is more often caused by 
an immune system defect that results in the 
production of a substance that acts like TSH with 
the secondary effect of producing an overactive 
thyroid. An enlarged thyroid gland in the 
hyperthyroid patient is called a toxic goiter .  
Treatment may involve surgical removal of thyroid 
tissue or destruction of thyroid tissue accomplished 
by having the patient ingest highly concentrated  
radioactive iodine.  
   Hyperthyroidism is often accompanied by 
edema formation in the back of the orbits of the 
eyes.  The result is a characteristic bulging of the 
eyeballs referred to as exophthalmus.   The most 
common type of hyperthyroidism, called Graves’s 
disease, is caused by defect in the immune system 
and is accompanied by exophthalmus. 
 Hypothyroidism results from reduction in 
hormone output from the thyroid gland.  It is 
important to realize that hypothyroidism can also 
produce enlargement of the gland.  This is calle d a 
simple goiter.  Consider the patient suffering from 
a dietary deficiency of iodine.  Without iodine, even 
a healthy gland cannot produce thyroid hormone. 
As levels of the hormone decrease, we expect levels 
of TSH to increase by negative feedback.  The 
increased stimulation of the thyroid gland by TSH 
causes it to enlarge producing a simple goiter.  
However, no matter how large the thyroid becomes, 
without iodine the patient remains hypothyroid.  
Hypothyroidism is relieved by oral consumption of 
synthetic thyroid hormone. 
 Thyroid hormone is important for normal 
protein synthesis and nerve activity.  Thyroid 
deficiency in newborn infants causes retarded 
growth and mental retardation.  This condition is 
called cretinism.  In cretinism, skeletal growth is 
retarded more than soft tissue growth, so unlike the 
pituitary dwarf, the infant is neither of normal size 
nor normally proportioned.  The effects of cretinism 
often fail to appear until after birth because the 
developing fetus is exposed to maternal thyroi d 
hormone. 
   Hyperthyroid Hypothyroid 
Personality Restless, irritable, “hyper” Listless, lethargic, mentally dull 
Cardiovascular system Elevated heart rate, blood pressure Heart rate, blood pressure reduced 
Gastrointestinal system 
Increased motility, secretion. Prone 
to diarrhea. Weight loss despite 
good appetite. 
Decreased motility, secretion. Prone to 
constipation. Weight gain despite poor 
appetite. 
Temperature control 
Increased metabolic rate translates 
to increase heat production. 
Intolerant of hot weather. 
Decreased metabolic rate translates to 
difficulty in producing heat. Intolerant of 
cold weather. 
Cell function 
Cellular metabolism and 
mitochondrial activity are increased. 
Increased glucose and oxygen 
uptake. 
Cellular metabolism and mitochondrial 
activity are decreased. Decreased 
glucose and oxygen uptake.

===== PAGE 102 =====
98 
LESSON 33:  ADRENAL GLANDS AND PANCREAS  
 
THE ADRENAL GLANDS  
  The adrenal glands are located one above 
each kidney (suprarenal).  As is true for all glands, 
they have an extremely rich blood supply.  
Structurally, the adrenal g land is composed of an 
outer cortex and an inner medulla.  Covering the 
cortex is a connective tissue capsule.  The cortex is 
composed of three concentric zones of glandular 
epithelial cells with sinusoid spaces between.  The 
cortical hormones are made and  stored within the 
cells and secreted into the blood flowing through 
the sinusoid spaces.    
  The cortex surrounds the inner medulla.  
This region is composed of clumps of glandular 
epithelial cells with large sinus spaces between.  
Similar kinds of cells are also found near adrenergic 
synapses in the sympathetic nervous system.  While 
cortex cells can regenerate if partially destroyed, 
medullary cells cannot.  However, cells of the 
cortex are more vital than those of the medulla. 
 As described below, t he secretory activity 
of the adrenal cortex is controlled through the 
renin-angiotensin system and by negative 
feedback involving the pituitary gland and 
hypothalamus.  Hormone release from the medulla 
is initiated by nerve impulses from the sympathetic 
nervous system  as part of the body's normal 
response to stress.  
MEDULLARY HORMONES 
About 75% of the hormonal output of the 
medulla is epinephrine (adrenalin) and 25% is 
norepinephrine.  They are amine -based hormones 
and, like the thyroid amines, are derived fr om the 
amino acid tyrosine.  The medullary hormones act 
to prolong and enhance the effects of the 
sympathetic nervous system. Recall that 
norepinephrine is also a transmitter substance at 
neuromuscular junctions in the sympathetic nervous 
system. The effec ts of medullary hormones on 
target organs mimic sympathetic nervous system 
effects.  The endocrine effects begin more slowly 
but generally last longer than the neural effects.  
The most striking effect of medullary hormones is 
their ability to increase blood pressure .  Blood 
pressure can be increased by increasing the output 
of the heart or by narrowing the blood vessels. 
Epinephrine increases blood pressure 
primarily by increasing heart rate and stroke 
volume, thereby increasing cardiac output.   
 
While e pinephrine does vasoconstrict vessels in 
certain beds (the digestive organs and kidneys, for 
example), it vasodilates vessels in other organs 
(skeletal muscle that needs more blood during 
stress, for example). The effects cancel; total 
peripheral resistance does not change much. 
  Norepinephrine increases cardiac output 
only slightly compared to epinephrine.  However, 
norepinephrine vasoconstricts blood vessels in all 
target organs, causing a significant increase in 
total peripheral resistance and blood pressure.   
 The sympathetic effects of the medullary 
hormones are not limited to the cardiovascular 
system.  Epinephrine is a potent bronchodilator and 
is frequently used to dilate bronchioles constricted 
during by asthma attacks.  Epinephrine also helps to 
elevate blood glucose by stimulating the conversion 
of glycogen to glucose in the liver, a process called 
glycogenolysis (literally, the lysis of glycogen). 
 Loss of the gland would decrease the 
body's efficiency in responding to stress but is 
generally not life threatening.  Excessive secretion 
of medullary hormone causes severe sustained or 
intermittent hypertension.   
HORMONES OF THE CORTEX 
 The hormones of the cortex  are of three 
varieties: glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and 
some androgenic (male)  steroids.  The steroid 
hormones of the adrenal cortex are derived from the 
steroid molecule cholesterol.

===== PAGE 103 =====
99 
Mineralocorticoids help 
maintain electrolyte 
balance by increasing the 
reabsorption of sodium 
ions from the distal 
convoluted tubules in 
renal nephr ons. As 
sodium ions reenter the 
blood, the plasma 
becomes hyperosmotic 
and, as a result, water is 
reabsorbed as well.  
Reabsorption of sodium also causes secretion of 
potassium and hydrogen ions into the urine.  The 
main human mineralocorticoid is aldosterone.  Its 
control by the renin -angiotensin system was 
discussed along with the urinary system.   
 The glucocorticoids help to insure the 
body has enough available fuel to meet its energy 
needs.  The main fuel of the body is glucose and the 
glucocorticoids help provide glucose by mobilizing 
fatty acids and amino acids and stimulating the liver 
enzymes that then convert them into glucose by the 
process of gluconeogenesis (literally, the birth of 
new glucose).  The primary glucocorticoid in 
humans is cortisol.  Release of cortisol is 
stimulated by the hypothalamic hormone CRH 
(corticotrophin releasing hormone) and the anterior 
pituitary hormone ACTH (adrenocorticotropic 
hormone).  High levels of cortisol then reduce the 
production of CRH and ACTH by negative 
feedback control.   
 The adrenal 
glands are important 
in helping us deal with 
stress.  The hormones 
of the medulla 
enhance the effects of 
the sympathetic 
nervous system 
providing adequate 
oxygen and blood 
flow.  In addition, 
stress stimulates the 
hypothalamus to 
release CRH triggering the chain of events leading 
to the release of cortisol and elevation to blood 
glucose- additional fuel for increased energy 
demands in stress.  
 Pharmacologic (not physiologic) doses of   
glucocorticoids act to reduce inflammat ion in 
injured tissues.  The inflammatory response is one 
of the body's defense mechanisms that promotes 
healing, so use of anti -inflammatory drugs is not 
always of benefit. 
 The sex steroids of the adrenal cortex are 
androgenic (male) sex hormones.  The h ormones 
are present even in females where they are 
responsible for pubic and axillary hair growth.   
ADRENAL CORTEX ABNORMALITIES 
 Hypofunction of the adrenal cortex occurs 
in Addison's disease, characterized by muscular 
weakness and fatigue caused by hypo glycemia 
related to insufficient cortisol.  A more serious 
problem is the reduced sodium ion and water 
uptake due to lack of aldosterone.  This can lead to 
loss of blood pressure and fatal shock if not treated. 
 Because reabsorption of sodium ions is linke d to 
secretion of hydrogen ions (counter -transport) loss 
of aldosterone is associate with hydrogen ion 
retention leading to acidosis and coma.  Low levels 
of cortisol stimulate release of excessive amounts 
of ACTH. The hormone ACTH is chemically 
similar to a hormone that enables certain animals to 
darken their skin color to blend into their 
surroundings.  It is the excess ACTH that causes the 
darkening of the skin associated with Addison's 
disease.  
 Hyperfunction of the adrenal cortex is 
called Cushing's syndrome.  Excess amounts of 
cortisol cause significant loss of protein to 
gluconeogenesis.  Muscle wasting, bruising, poor 
healing, thinning of the skin and osteoporosis all 
result. The hyperglycemia caused by excess 
gluconeogenesis stimulates the pancreas to release 
the hormone insulin in an attempt to lower glucose 
levels. If the hyperglycemia is severe, the over -
stimulated pancreas fails, resulting in diabetes 
mellitus. Excess aldosterone causes salt and water 
retention leading to hypertension. If levels  of 
androgenic hormones rise, sexual precocity in 
males and masculinization in females may also 
occur. 
HORMONES OF THE PANCREAS 
 The pancreas, an important accessory 
organ of the digestive system, is also the source of 
the endocrine hormones insulin and gl ucagon.  
Together, these two hormones maintain the normal

===== PAGE 104 =====
100 
blood glucose concentration at between 80 and 120 
mg per 100 ml of blood. 
 Scattered throughout the pancreas are 
clusters of endocrine cells called the islets of 
Langerhans.  Each islet is supplied by a network of 
capillaries for hormone transport. The two main cell 
types in the islets are the alpha cells that produce 
the hormone glucagon, and the beta cells that 
produce insulin.  Both of these hormones are 
proteins. 
 Insulin has the effect of lowering blood 
glucose by increasing the uptake of glucose into 
liver, muscle and adipose tissue cells.  In liver and 
muscle, the glucose taken up is converted to a 
storage molecule called glycogen.  The conversion 
of glucose to glycogen is called glycogenesis 
(literally, the birth of glycogen).  In adipose cells, 
glucose is converted to fat.  The stimulus for insulin 
release from beta cells is hyperglycemia- high 
blood glucose. Blood sugar normally begins to 
increase during a meal as glucose is absorbed into 
the blood. Insulin causes most of the absorbed 
glucose to be temporarily stored for release as 
needed between meals. 
 Glucagon acts to increase blood glucose by 
releasing it from the liver.  The stimulus for 
glucagon production is hypoglycemia (low blood 
sugar).  Between meals, as cells consume glucose 
for energy production, blood glucose levels fall.  
Glucagon then acts to increase blood sugar 
primarily by converting glycogen back to glucose - 
the process of glycogenolysis.  Recall that 
epinephrine also promotes glycogenolysis, although 
not as efficiently as glucagon.  So while there is 
only one hormone that lowers blood glucose 
(insulin), there are three that increase blood glucose 
levels (epinephrine, glucagon and cortisol). 
 DIABETES MELLITUS 
  There are no other hormones that have the 
same effect as insulin on reducing blood sugar.  In 
diabetes mellitus the body is either unable to 
produce insulin or respond to insulin. T he result is 
high blood sugar (hyperglycemia).  The signs of 
diabetes mellitus related to  the defect in glucose 
metabolism are:  
 Hyperglycemia due to impaired glucose 
uptake by target cells, 
 Glycosuria (glucose in the urine) as glucose 
filters into the urine faster than it can be 
reabsorbed back into the blood,  
 Polyuria (increased urine outpu t) as glucose 
draws water into the urine by osmosis, 
 Polydypsia (increased thirst) to replace water 
lost in urine,  
 Ketosis (fruity smelling ketone molecules in 
the blood) caused by over -using fat oxidation 
as an energy source, 
 Acidosis (high concentration of hydrogen ions 
[low pH] in the blood) caused by the acidic 
ketone residues,  
 Coma resulting from acidotic suppression of 
nervous system.        
  Even diabetics treated with insulin often 
suffer complications related to structural changes in 
their blood vessels.  These include poor circulation, 
visual problems, renal disease, infection, 
ulcerations, peripheral vascular disease and heart 
disease.   
 Taking too much insulin causes the diabetic 
to go into insulin shock .  Recall that insulin 
increases the uptake of glucose in liver, muscle and 
fat.  It is not required for glucose uptake by nerve 
tissue.  In addition, the only substrate the nervous 
system can metabolize for energy is glucose.  For 
this reason, an overdose of insulin can be fatal.  The 
excessive insulin causes too much glucose to enter 
liver, muscle and fat, leaving the nervous system 
starved for glucose.  As a result, the diabetic lapses 
into the convulsions characteristic of insulin shock. 
The hypoglycemia of insulin shock is reversed by 
giving sugar. 
 There are two types of diabetes mellitus - 
juvenile onset and adult onset.  Juvenile onset is the 
more serious form.  The body attacks its islet cells 
as if they were foreign, leaving them totally 
dysfunctional.  The juvenile onset diabetic must be 
treated with insulin injection or inhalation.  Insulin 
is a protein and would be digested if taken orally. 
  Adult onset diabetes is less severe. Here, 
insulin receptors become less responsive.  The 
defect can often be controlled by diet and exercise 
alone.  If the hyperglycemia persists, the adult onset 
diabetic can often be treated with drugs that 
stimulate insulin receptors. Obesity has been linked 
to the development of adult onset diabetes.

===== PAGE 105 =====
101 
LESSON 34:  THE PARATHYROID GLANDS AND BONE PHYSIOLOGY 
 
SKELETAL SYSTEM 
 The predominant tissue of the skeleton is 
bone.  Bone is a solid connective tissue composed 
of living osteocytes (bone cells) surrounded by an 
intercellular matrix composed mainly of inorganic 
calcium salts and collagen  protein.  Bone surfaces 
are covered with a fibrous connective tissue called 
the periosteum.  This covering is continuous with 
the coverings of tendons that connect bones to 
muscles and ligaments that connect bones to each 
other.  Cavities within bones are lined with a 
fibrous connective tissue endosteum and filled 
with red or yellow bone marrow.  Additionally, an 
extensive network of blood vessels within bone 
matrix supplies the cells with required nutrients. 
 Osteocytes are arranged in concentric rings 
around a central osteonic canal  that contains the 
blood vessels and nerves.  The concentric rings of 
bone matrix that form around each canal are called 
lamellae.  The cavity within which the bone cell is 
found is called the lacuna. Canaliculi (little canals) 
run between the lacun ae providing a path for 
nutrients from the osteonic canal.  Bone arranged in 
dense parallel networks of osteons is called 
compact bone .  In other places in a bone, the 
osteocytes may be arranged in more of a loose 
network of branching plates called trabeculae.  
This bone is called spongy (cancellous) bone.  The 
canaliculi extend from the lacunae directly to the 
outer surface of the trabeculae.  The spaces between 
trabeculae are filled with marrow.       
 In the flat bones of the skull, spongy bone 
is sandwi ched between inner and outer layers of 
compact bone.  In long bones, the shaft of the bone 
is compact and the ends are spongy bone covered 
with a thin layer of compact bone. 
BONE COMPOSITION 
 Bone is living tissue composed of 
osteocytes located within a no n-living intracellular 
matrix.  About two-thirds of the matrix is inorganic; 
mainly calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate 
salts.  The calcium salts provide strength but also 
make the bones brittle.  About one -third of the 
matrix is organic, the main cons tituent being 
collagen protein.  This provides a certain degree of 
flexibility.  With age, the bone matrix gradually 
becomes less organic and more inorganic and bone 
becomes more brittle. Also associated with aging is 
the tendency to develop osteoporosis, a disease in 
which bone matrix is replaced by softer fibrous and 
fatty tissues.  The weakened bones are prone to 
spontaneous fracture.  Many factors contribute 
including a history of inadequate dietary calcium 
and loss of estrogen after menopause in women.   
 Vitamins D and C are important for bone 
development.  Vitamin D is required for absorption 
of dietary calcium. A deficiency results in 
osteomalacia (rickets).  Bones lose rigidity and 
weight-bearing bones may begin to bow.  Vitamin 
C is necessary for c ollagen formation and a 
deficiency can result is brittle bones.  
 Several hormones affect bone growth and 
development; the rationale for covering the skeletal 
system in this lesson .  Growth  hormone is the 
obvious example but other hormones are involved 
as well.  The balance between calcium ion 
concentration in the blood and calcium ion 
concentration in bone is controlled by the two 
hormones discussed below. 
BONE MARROW 
 Marrow is found filling cavities within the 
bone.  The two types of marrow are yellow marrow 
and red marrow. 
 Initially, bone marrow is red.  It contains 
the blood forming cells for all types of blood cells, 
including the erythrocytes.  The red color comes 
from the oxygen transporting molecule hemoglobin. 
 Initially, the spleen and liver also  produce blood 
cells but beyond infancy, all blood cells except for 
certain white cells are produced exclusively in red 
marrow.  Red marrow is replaced by yellow 
marrow in many bone cavities but persists in the 
spongy bone spaces of the skull, sternum, rib s, 
vertebrae and pelvis.   
 Yellow marrow that comes to occupy other 
bone cavities is composed primarily of adipose 
tissue stores.  
SKELETON DEVELOPMENT 
 The two mechanisms for bone formation 
are intramembranous and endochondral 
(cartilaginous).

===== PAGE 106 =====
102 
 The flat bones that form the skull are 
examples of bone that develops by an 
intramembranous process.  Initially, a fibrous 
connective tissue membrane forms from primitive 
connective tissue cells that then differentiate into 
bone forming cells called osteoblasts.  A s the 
osteoblasts begin to deposit bone matrix, the 
membrane is gradually replaced by bone.  At birth, 
these membranes have not completely ossified.  
Soft spots in the skull, called fontanals, persist for 
up to eighteen months or so after birth.   
 Long bo nes of the body increase in 
diameter by an intramembranous process. 
Osteoblasts in the periosteum, a thin layer of 
fibrous tissue covering the bones, begin to deposit 
bone around the outer edges.  The center of a long 
bone has a hollow space called the medulary 
cavity that is lined with a layer of fibrous tissue 
called the endostium. As new bone is layered on the 
outside, bone -digesting cells called osteoclasts 
reabsorb bone from the inner surface beneath the 
endosteum, enlarging the diameter of the medulary 
cavity. The overall thickness of the ring of bone, in 
this way, remains the same. The tubular nature of 
long bones uses the same principle as tubular steel 
for scaffolding, providing maximum strength with 
minimum weight.  
 Other bones in the body develop  by 
endochondral bone formation.  Long bones of the 
arms and legs are examples.  Initially, the bone 
appears as cartilage. Cartilage cells called 
chondrocytes occupy the lacunae. Then, gradually, 
the chondrocytes enlarge and then deteriorate to be 
replaced by osteoblasts that begin to deposit bone 
matrix.  In long bones, ossification begins in the 
shaft of the bone called the diaphysis.  This is the 
primary ossification center that begins to develop in 
early prenatal development, beginning at about the 
third month.  During infancy and early childhood, 
secondary ossification centers form on either end of 
the bone.  The end of a long bone is called the 
epiphysis.   
 The cartilage plates that persist between the 
diaphysis and the distal and proximal epiphyses are 
called the epiphyseal plates.  As long as these 
cartilage disks persist, bone can continue to grow in 
length along plate surface.  By late teens to early 
twenties, all cartilage plates have been completely 
ossified. The bone can no longer grow in length. On 
the ends of bones that form freely movable joints, a 
layer of hyaline cartilage persists, providing a 
smooth, low friction surface for bones moving 
against each other in the joint.   
JOINTS 
 Joints or articulations are places where two 
or more bones c ome together. Classification of 
joints is made both according to the amount of 
movement possible and the type of tissue forming 
the structure of the joint. By movement, joints are 
classified as immovable, slightly movable, and 
freely movable. By structure, joints are classified as 
fibrous, cartilaginous or synovial.  
Fibrous joints occur when two bones join 
together with just a layer of fibrous connective 
tissue between them . Most are synarthroses, the 
term for immovable joints. Examples are the 
sutures joining the bones of the skull.  The jagged 
edges of bone form a tight, interlocking joint. 
Cartilagenous joints form with a layer of 
cartilage separating the bones. Most cartilaginous 
joints are amphiarthroses, the term for slightly 
movable joints.  The symphysis pubis connecting 
the two pelvic bones and the joints between the 
vertebrae are examples.  In the vertebral column, a 
disk of cartilage separates the bodies of adjoining 
vertebrae. Only a slight amount of movement is 
possible between any two of the vertebrae. 
 Synovial joints, are joints that allow free 
movement.  Synovial fluid, secreted by synovial 
membranes lining the joint cavity, lubricate the 
joint.  The smooth cartilage covering the ends of the 
bones and the lubricating fluid help to reduce 
friction between the moving bones. Synovial joints 
are also referred to as diarthroses, the term for 
freely movable joints. Diarthrotic joints are 
subdivided into several kinds based on the range of 
free motion possible. These include: 
 Ball and socket  joints, such as the hip and 
shoulder.  Here movement is possible in many 
planes, allowing flexion and extension as well as 
adduction and abduction and all combinations in 
between. 
 Hinge joints such as the elbow and knee allow 
movement in only one plane (flexion an d 
extension). 
 Pivot joints involve rotation such as occurs 
turning the head side to side or rotating the

===== PAGE 107 =====
103 
radius on the humerus, turning the palms up or 
down. 
 Gliding joints such as those of the wrist and 
ankle, involve bones sliding over one another. 
 
CALCIUM REGULATION 
 Calcium is an important structural component 
in bones and teeth. It is also required to initiate 
muscle contraction and is necessary to activate 
certain enzymatically controlled reactions such as 
blood clotting.  Calcium  ion reduces the inf lux of 
sodium ions into nerve cells and thus inhibits action 
potentials, suppressing the nervous system.  Plasma 
calcium ion levels are controlled by two hormones- 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) from the parathyroid 
glands, and calcitonin from the thyroid gland. 
PARATHYROID HORMONE 
  The parathyroid glands produce 
parathyroid hormone (PTH), a protein hormone that 
has the effect of increasing blood calcium ion 
levels when they begin to fall below normal.  PTH 
provides calcium  ion by acting on three major 
systems. PTH removes calcium  ions from bone, 
increases the reabsorption of calcium ions from the 
nephrons of the kidneys, and increases the intestinal 
absorption of calcium ion.   The effect of PTH on 
the absorption of calcium from the gut is indirect.  
PTH acts i n the kidneys to cause vitamin D to be 
converted from an inactive to an active form.  
Vitamin D then acts on the small intestines to 
increase the absorption of dietary calcium ion. 
  Hyperparathyroidism results in elevated 
blood calcium ion levels.  As men tioned above, 
elevated blood calcium ion levels  suppresses the 
nervous system, leading to fatigue, muscle 
weakness and altered mental functions.  Excess 
calcium ion filtration in the kidney often results in 
kidney stone formation.  Excess reabsorption of 
calcium ion from the skeleton results in softening of 
the bones and can lead to spontaneous fractures. 
Excess calcium ion can also lead to dangerous 
cardiac arrhythmias. The cause of 
hyperparathyroidism is usually a tumor in a 
parathyroid gland that may be surgically removed. 
 Hypoparathyroidism results in lower than 
normal blood calcium  ion levels that reduce the 
efficiency of contracting muscle and over-stimulate 
the nervous system.  As a result the patient often 
suffers from muscle spasms, tetany and 
convulsions.  Severe spasm of laryngeal muscles 
has been known to cause suffocation.   Because 
administration of PTH has undesirable side effects, 
treatment usually involves giving injections of 
calcium salts or massive doses of vitamin D.  
CALCITONIN 
  Besides the hormones produced in the thyroid 
follicles, the thyroid gland also produces the 
hormone calcitonin that lowers blood calcium ion 
levels when they become higher than normal.  The 
hormone is produced by "C" cells located between 
the thyroid follicles.   Unlike PTH, calcitonin has 
one major site of action - the skeleton.  Calcitonin 
lowers blood calcium ion concentration by 
increasing its uptake in bone.  Calcitonin released at 
mealtime causes the calcium absorbed from the gut 
to be taken out of the blood and stored in bone.    
      Control of levels of the calcium  ion regulating 
hormones is simple and direct.  Low blood calcium 
ion stimulates the parathyroid glands to release 
PTH and high blood calcium ion levels stimulate 
the thyroid gland to produce calcitonin.
.

===== PAGE 108 =====
104 
MAJOR HORMONES OF THE BODY 
HORMONE FORM SOURCE TRIGGER TARGET ACTION CONTROL 
ADH PEPTIDE HYPO- 
THALAMUS DEHYDRATION KIDNEY REABSORB WATER NERVE 
REFLEX 
OXYTOCIN PEPTIDE HYPO- 
THALAMUS 
LABOR, 
SUCKLING 
UTERUS, 
BREAST 
CONTRACTIONS           
MILK  EJECTION 
NERVE 
REFLEX 
PROLACTIN PROTEIN ANTERIOR 
PITUITARY CHILDBIRTH BREAST MILK PRODUCTION PIF FROM 
HYPOTHAL 
GROWTH 
HORMONE PROTEIN ANTERIOR 
PITUITARY CHILDHOOD GROWING 
TISSUES 
PROTEIN UPTAKE 
BONE FORMATION 
HYPOTHAL 
GHRH 
THYROXINE AND 
T3 AMINE THYROID LOW META- 
BOLIC RATE ALL CELLS INCREASE META- 
BOLIC RATE 
NEGATIVE 
FEEDBACK 
CALCITONIN 
 PROTEIN THYROID HIGH BLOOD 
Ca++ BONE LOWER BLOOD Ca++ 
LEVELS 
HIGH Ca++ IN 
BLOOD 
PTH PROTEIN PARATHYROID LOW BLOOD 
Ca++ 
BONE, KIDNEY 
GI TRACT 
RAISE BLOOD Ca++ 
LEVELS 
LOW Ca++ IN 
BLOOD 
CORTISOL 
 STERIOD ADRENAL 
CORTEX 
STRESS, LOW 
BLOOD SUGAR LIVER RAISE BLOOD SUGAR; 
GLUCONEOGENESIS 
NEGATIVE 
FEEDBACK 
ALDOSTERONE STERIOD ADRENAL 
CORTEX 
LOW SODIUM, 
LOW BP KIDNEY INCREASE BLOOD 
SODIUM & VOLUME 
RENIN 
SYSTEM 
NOREPI- 
NEPHRINE AMINE ADRENAL 
MEDULLA STRESS BLOOD VESSELS VASOCONSTRICT  
TO INCREASE BP 
NERVE 
REFLEX 
EPINEPHRINE AMINE ADRENAL 
MEDULLA 
STRESS, LOW 
BLOOD SUGAR HEART, LIVER INCREASE BP, 
GLYCOGENOLYSIS  
NERVE 
REFLEX 
INSULIN PROTEIN PANCREAS HIGH BLOOD 
SUGAR 
LIVER, FAT AND 
MUSCLE 
DROP  BLOOD SUGAR; 
GLYCOGENESIS 
HIGH BLOOD 
SUGAR 
GLUCAGON PROTEIN PANCREAS LOW BLOOD 
SUGAR LIVER RAISE  BLOOD SUGAR, 
GLYCOGENOLYSIS 
LOW BLOOD 
SUGAR 
SEX HORMONES STEROID OVARIES, 
TESTES PUBERTY VARIOUS 
ORGANS 
SEXUAL 
CHARACTERISTICS 
NEGATIVE 
FEEDBACK

===== PAGE 109 =====
105 
LESSON 35:  THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM  
 
Primary Reproductive Organs:                     
 The right and left Testes                  
− Seminiferous tubules produce sperm cells. 
− Interstitial Cells (of Leydig) produce male sex 
hormones (androgens, mainly testosterone.) 
 Accessory Sex Organs: 
− Seminal Vesicles (2) 
− Prostate Gland (1) 
− Bulbourethral Glands (2) 
 Duct system: 
− Epididymis (2) 
− Vas Deferens (2)  
− Ejaculatory Duct (2) 
− Urethra (Penis) (1) 
TESTES 
 The 
right and left 
testes are 
located in a 
pouch-like 
sac called the 
scrotum.  
Each testis is 
divided into 
about 250 
lobules in 
which are 
found coils of 
seminiferous tubules. Uncoiled, the total length of 
the tubule  system would be about half a mile.  
Within these tubules, the sperm begin the develop. 
Between the tubules, the interstitial cells produce 
androgen hormones. 
SPERMATOGENESIS 
 Germinal epithelial cells, called 
spermatogonia are located near the outer wall of 
the seminiferous tubules. Throughout the male’s 
lifetime, they co ntinue to divide by mitosis, 
ensuring a continuous supply. Starting at puberty, 
groups of them begin to transform into primary 
spermatocytes. Each spermatogonium, containing 
46 chromosomes in humans, will develop into four 
sperm with 23 chromosomes each.  This 
transformation occurs in a cell division process 
called meiosis shown below.  Spermatogonia can 
therefore divide by mitosis into new spermatogonia 
or develop into primary spermatocytes.  Unlike 
mitosis, in which the number of chromosomes is 
preserved a s cells divide, meiosis is a reduction 
division in which the number of chromosomes is 
reduced by half, that is then followed by a second 
division. In meiosis, the primary spermatocytes 
with 46 chromosomes first divide into two 
secondary spermatocytes with 23 chromosomes 
each.  Each of the two secondary spermatocytes 
divides into two spermatids, still with 23 
chromosomes each.  The four spermatids then 
transform into sperm cells.  As the cells progress 
through the stages of meiosis, they move toward the 
center of the tubules where the sperm are released. 
The sperm are passively moved through the tubules 
and out of the testis.  Movement is generated by 
peristaltic contraction of the walls of the duct 
system. 
 Also associated with the walls of the 
seminiferous tubules are large sustenticular cells 
(Sertoli cells ) that play a role in nourishing 
germinal cells, controlling their transformation and 
protecting them during the vulnerable periods of 
cell division.  
 Once formed, e ach normal sperm has a 
body containing the genetic information 
(chromosomes), and a tail called a flagellum for 
locomotion. A structure called the acrosome sits 
atop the body of each sperm cells. The acrosome 
contains enzymes necessary to digest away the cells 
and matrix that surrounds the ovum.  
 Each milliliter of semen contains about 100 
million sperm.  Large numbers of sperm are 
required for two reasons.  First, most sperm do not 
find their way to the site of fertilization, the

===== PAGE 110 =====
106 
female uterine tube.  Secondly, sperm release an 
enzyme to help  breakdown the ring of ovarian 
cells that surround the ovum.  Too few sperm 
results in too little of this enzyme. 
 Only one sperm cell will enter an ovum in 
the process of fertilization.  When it enters an 
ovum, the ovum is changed so that all other sperm 
are repelled. The change involves a reversal of 
polarity of the ovum cell membrane and the release 
of chemical inhibitors from the penetrated ovum. 
  Human cells have 44 chromosomes called 
autosomes and 2 sex chromosomes for a total of 46. 
 Males have an X and a Y sex chromosome.  In fact, 
males are males because they have an X and a Y 
chromosome in each cell. Since the chromosomes 
are divided in meiosis, half the sperm contain an X 
chromosome and half a Y chromosome.  In females, 
both sex chromosomes are X (females being 
females because they have 2 X chromosomes) and 
all ova contain one X chromosome.  Therefore, if 
an X sperm fertilizes an ovum, a female offspring 
results (XX) and if a Y sperm fertilizes and ovum, a 
male results (XY). 
THE PATHWAY FOR SPERM 
 Adjacent to each testis is a coiled tubule 
about 20 feet long called the epididymis.  Sperm 
enter the epididymis from the testis.  Here they are 
kept in an acidic environment to keep them 
immobile.  Glycogen is secreted for energy.  Sperm 
maturation is c ompleted in the epididymis.  The 
sperm are moved by peristaltic contractions of the 
walls of the epididymis. A duct called the vas 
deferens extends from the lower part of each 
epididymis.  The vas deferens carries sperm, by 
peristaltic contractions, into t he pelvic cavity and 
toward the prostate gland .  Sperm can spend 
several weeks in the vas deferens. Near the prostate, 
the vas deferens is enlarged forming an ampulla.  At 
this point, secretions from the seminal vesicles are 
added.  Seminal vesicle secretions contain fructose 
for energy and prostaglandins to stimulate uterine 
contractions helping to propel the sperm toward the 
uterine tubes, the site of fertilization.  On each side, 
the duct from the seminal vesicle and the vas 
deferens join to form a single ejaculatory duct. This 
occurs at the outer edge of the prostate gland. As 
these ducts enter the prostate gland, one on each 
side, they are now called the ejaculatory ducts.  
While still within the prostate gland, the ejaculatory 
ducts join the urethra extending from the urinary 
bladder.  In males, the urethra serves both a urinary 
and reproductive function.  The prostate gland adds 
alkaline secretions of a milky consistency to the 
urethra.  The rise in pH enables the sperm to 
become more mobile.  The pros tate also releases 
enzymes to help breakdown semen that is slightly 
coagulated as it enters the uterus.   
 Two other glands called the bulbourethral 
glands at the base of the penis secrete mucus into 
the semen.  The mucus, along with that produced in 
the vagina, provide lubrication helping to establish 
the satisfactory massaging sensation important for 
copulation.  In all, 3 to 5 milliliters of semen is 
released from the penis. 
 Sperm release involves erection, emission 
and ejaculation.  Erection is under c ontrol of the 
parasympathetic nervous system.  Three bands of 
erectile sinusoidal tissue, the two corpora 
cavernosa in the superior portion of the shaft of the 
penis and the single corpus spongiosum below, 
extend the through the length of the penis.  The 
urethra runs through the center of the corpus 
spongiosum.  Nerve impulses from the 
parasympathetic nervous system cause inflow 
vessels to dilate and outflow vessels to constrict and 
the tissue engorges with blood, enlarges and 
stiffens.  As is typical for p arasympathetic control, 
erection is a single -organ response. It may or may 
not occur in association with emission and 
ejaculation. It may occur during sexual stimulation 
or spontaneously.  
 Emission refers to process of moving the 
sperm and the secretions of the reproductive glands 
into the urethra, ready for discharge. It is essentially

===== PAGE 111 =====
107 
a process of “charging and pressurizing the lines” 
using a fire hose analogy. Ejaculation refers to the 
release of sperm, under pressure, from the penis .  
Emission and ejaculation occur together during the 
process of orgasm under control of the sympathetic 
nervous system. Sympathetic responses are 
generally “whole body responses” with multiple 
organ systems responding in coordinated fashion. 
Orgasm is a “whole body response”  accompanied 
with rhythmic skeletal muscle contractions, 
increased heart rate  and respiration, sweating and 
the like, all under sympathetic nervous system 
control. 
ANDROGEN FUNCTION OF THE TESTES  
 The interstitial cells, located between the 
seminiferous tubules, secrete androgenic (male sex) 
steroid hormones. In human males, the primary 
androgen is testosterone. The anterior pituitary 
hormone ICSH (interstitial cell stimulating 
hormone) stimulates androgen production and 
release using the 
familiar negative 
feedback control 
system shown in 
the figure . (In 
females, this 
same pituitary 
hormone is more 
appropriately 
called luteinizing 
hormone or LH.)  
 The anterior pituitary also produces another 
stimulating hormone that targets the primary 
reproductive organs. The hormone is called follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH) , the same hormone 
produces in women and named for its target in the 
female ovary. Despite the fact that males do not 
have follicles, the name is still used. In males, FSH 
does not control hormone s ecretion as it does in 
females, however it is necessary to begin the 
process of spermatogenesis. FSH stimulates the 
sustanticular cells of the seminiferous tubules to 
initiate spermatogenesis, the process of sperm 
development from spermatagonia described earlier. 
The sustanticular cells, in turn, secrete a hormone 
called inhibin that reduces FSH secretion, keeping 
the process of sperm production under control by 
negative feedback. 
 
TESTOSTERONE 
 Testosterone is produced in the male fetus 
and in the first we eks after birth in the male infant 
to initiate development of male reproductive organs 
and the descent of the testes into the scrotum.  The 
cooler temperature in the scrotum is important for 
sperm survival.  Muscles in the wall of the scrotum 
contract and pull the testes closer to the body wall if 
the temperature becomes too cool. Testosterone 
production then stops until the time of puberty.  
After puberty, testosterone completes the 
development of secondary sex organs and 
reproductive ducts.  Testosterone is also required to 
complete each cycle of spermatogenesis. 
   Certain other characteristics not directly 
related to reproduction are influenced by 
testosterone.  Body hair growth (except the scalp) 
and sebaceous gland secretion are stimulated by 
testosterone.  In fact, female androgens (probably 
from the adrenal cortex) are responsible for axillary 
and pubic hair growth and acne in females as well.  
Testosterone is responsible for the enlarged larynx 
(deeper voice) in males.  Its effects on tissue growth 
result in the rougher skin, more muscular build, and 
taller stature in males.  Fat deposition patterns are 
influenced by sex hormones as well.  Males tend to 
accumulate excess fat in the anterior abdominal 
wall above the waist producing the characteristic 
male potbelly.    
STERILIZATION 
 Sterilization is achieved by interrupting the 
pathway for sperm. In males, this is accomplished 
by cutting and ligating both vas deferens 
(vasectomy) within the scrotum. In females the 
uterine tubes are cut and ligated ( tubal ligation), 
blocking the path to the ovarian end of the uterine 
tube where fertilization takes place. In either 
procedure, the blood vessels are not ligated. The 
blood levels of reproductive hormones are not 
changed. Because hormones are responsible for 
maintaining secondary reproductive organs, these 
structures continue to function normally. The 
prostate gland, seminal vesicles and bulbourethral 
glands continue to produce their secretions. Semen 
still forms, but it is sperm -free. Erection, emission 
and ej aculation occur as before. In females, 
hormones continue to direct the sexual cycles. 
Ovulation and menstruation continue to occur. 
Sperm, however, are unable to reach the ova that 
are produced.

===== PAGE 112 =====
108 
LESSON 36:  THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
 
Primary Sex Organs 
 The Ovaries (2) 
− Follicular cells produce ova and estrogen 
− Luteal cells produce estrogens and 
progesterone 
 Accessory Organs 
− Uterine tubes (2) 
− Uterus 
− Vagina 
− Vestibular glands (2) 
− Clitoris 
− Labia 
 
OOGENESIS 
 In females, oogonia cells are formed from 
the germinal epithelium and develop into about a 
million primary oocytes early in fetal life.  These 
primary oocytes then remain dormant until puberty. 
By that time, more than half of them have been lost. 
Only about 500 of those remaining will eventually 
become mature ova.  Beginning at menarche (the 
first sexual cycle), about 20 primary oocytes begin 
to mature with at the onset of each cycle.  Of these, 
only one will develop into a mature ovum by 
meiosis, as shown below.  The primary oocyte with 
46 chromosomes divides into a single secondary 
oocyte with 23 chromosomes and a smaller polar 
body that fails to develop. The secondary oocyte 
divides into an ovum and another polar body.  
Unlike the male in which each spermatogonium 
produces four sperm, a single oogo nium produces 
only one ovum. 
 The ova are produced in the primary 
female reproductive organs, the right and left 
ovary.   With e ach sexual cycle, many primary 
follicles begin to develop under the influence of 
FSH. Only one will become a mature follicle, 
however. Cells of the maturing primary follicle 
surround the developing ovum and produce 
estrogen hormones, the principal estrogen in human 
females being estradiol. 
 A cavity called the antrum forms within 
the follicle.  The cavity is filled with a nutritive and 
hormone rich follicular fluid. The ovum, 
surrounded with a thick matrix called the zona 
pellucida and a ring of cells called the corona 
radiata, is found on the edge of the antrum.  The 
primary follicle has now become  a secondary 
follicle.  As the fo llicle continues to mature, it 
moves toward the surface of the ovary, appearing as 
a sort of blister.  Soon the mature follicle ruptures 
and the secondary oocyte and its surrounding cells 
are released from the follicle and the ovary.  This is 
ovulation.  T he free secondary oocyte and 
associated cells are drawn into the uterine tube 
aided by currents produced by the beating of 
millions of cilia that line the tub ule walls.  Within 
the end of the uterine tube nearest the ovary, 
fertilization take place. If fer tilized, t he second 
meiotic division occurs forming a fertilized ovum 
and polar body.  
 The follicular cells left behind in the ovary 
develop into the corpus luteum  that, under the 
influence of luteinizing hormone from the anterior 
pituitary gland , produce s both estrogens and the 
hormone progesterone. If fertilization has not 
occurred, the corpus luteum persists only until the 
end of the sexual cycle, about two weeks after 
ovulation. By then, it has converted to a corpus 
albicans that no longer produces hor mones and is 
ultimately lost.

===== PAGE 113 =====
109 
 ACCESSORY REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS 
 A uterine tube  (also called oviduct or 
fallopian tube) extends from each ovary to the 
uterus.  The wall of the uterine tube is not 
continuous with the wall of the ovary , but  its 
enlarged end ca lled the infundibulum has finger-
like projections called fimbriae that cup the ovary. 
The two uterine tubes are connected to the upper 
portion of the centrally located uterus.  The 
fertilized ovum is transported to the uterine cavity 
and attaches to the in ner endothelial lining of the 
uterus called the endometrium.  Below the 
endometrium is the uterine myometrium composed 
of smooth muscle that contracts during labor and 
delivery under the stimulation of the hormone 
oxytocin. The outer uterus is covered with  a 
connective tissue perimetrium. 
 Inferiorly, the uterus forms the cervix or 
neck that opens into the vagina.  The vaginal walls 
are lined with epithelial cells that secrete mucus for 
lubrication during intercourse.  In the female, 
urinary and reproductive systems are separate.  The 
urethra is anterior to the vagina.  Inner and outer 
folds of skin called the labia minor  and labia 
major, respectively, surround the anterior urethral 
orifice and posterior vaginal orifice.  Beneath the 
labia minor are the two vestibular glands that also 
contribute to mucus production.  Anteriorly, the 
labia minor extend to the clitoris, a small projection 
composed of erectile tissue similar to that in the 
male penis.  Like the penis, this tissue also engorges 
with blood and stiffens during arousal. 
THE SEXUAL CYCLE 
  The sexual cycle includes events occurring 
in the ovary (ovarian cycle) and events that occur in 
the uterus (menstrual cycle). 
 Follicular development in the ovaries 
occurs in a cycle of variable length averaging 2 8 
days.  The timing of the events is under control of 
the hypothalamus.  Hypothalamic hormones control 
the secretion of gonadotropic hormones of the 
anterior pituitary that, in turn, control follicular and 
luteal development in the ovaries and the 
production of female reproductive hormones by 
follicular and luteal cells.  The ovarian hormones, 
in turn, regulate the cyclic events occurring in the 
uterus.  The hierarchy of control and cyclic changes 
in hormone levels are illustrated below.    
 The first day of the cycle is, by convention, 
the first day of menstruation.  This part of the 
cycle lasts for about five days.  During this time, 
levels of FSH (follicle stimulating hormone) from 
the anterior pituitary begin to rise.  This hormone 
stimulates some of the primary follicles in the ovary 
to begin developing.  This is the follicular phase of 
the ovary.  Follicular cells of the ovary produce 
estrogen hormones that, in turn, stimulate the 
uterine lining to proliferate replacing uterine tissue 
lost at menstruati on.  This is the proliferative 
phase of the uterus. 
 On about day fourteen following onset of 
menstruation, the secondary oocyte is released from 
the ovary (ovulation), ending the follicular phase of 
the ovary.  The follicular phase is the most irregular 
phase time-wise, making it difficult to predict the 
day of ovulation based on the beginning of the 
previous menstruation.  Ovulation is triggered by a 
sudden rise in the hormone LH. After ovulation, LH 
levels remain high and cause the transformation of 
the ovarian follicle into a corpus luteum.  This is

===== PAGE 114 =====
110 
the luteal phase of the ovary.  The cells of the 
corpus luteum produce both estrogens and 
progesterone and these ovarian hormones act on the 
uterus to continue the development of the uterine 
lining.  The lini ng becomes more vascular and the 
cells more secretory, ready to provide nutrients for 
a zygote.  This is the secretory phase of the uterus. 
 Near the end of the cycle the level of 
GnRH from the hypothalamus falls.  As a result, 
LH levels from the pituitary  fall.  With no 
luteinizing hormone, the corpus luteum begins to 
deteriorate.  The corpus luteum is the source of 
estrogens and progesterone so with the failure of 
the corpus luteum, levels of these hormones fall.  
Since the ovarian hormones are required t o sustain 
the uterine lining, when their level falls, the uterine 
lining begins to shed.  Because of the vascular 
nature of the lining, its loss is associated with the 
bleeding that marks the beginning of menstruation 
and the first day of the next cycle.  The luteal phase 
lasts about fourteen days.  Its duration is not as 
variable as the duration of the follicular phase. 
 As with other hypothalamic and anterior 
pituitary hormones, gonadotropin levels are 
controlled by negative feedback as shown in the 
figure.  GnRH stimulates the release of FSH and 
LH.  FSH stimulates the release of estrogens and 
LH stimulates the release of both estrogens and 
progesterone from the ovary.  High levels of 
ovarian hormones then suppress the output of 
hormones from the hypotha lamus and anterior 
pituitary (negative feedback).  This can be 
demonstrated in a practical way by the oral 
contraceptive. Oral contraceptives contain synthetic 
estrogens and progesterone that keeps the blood 
levels of these steroid hormones high.  By negative 
feedback, this results in low levels of LH and FSH. 
 But for ovulation to occur, a sudden increase in LH 
is required.  By preventing the rise in LH, the birth 
control pill prevents ovulation.   With no ovum 
released, fertilization cannot occur. 
 
 
 When the supply of primary follicles is 
exhausted in the late forties, early fifties, menstrual 
cycling stops.  This is menopause.  Female steroid 
hormones are no longer produced within the ovaries 
and the cyclic development and shedding of the 
uterine endometrial lining stops.

===== PAGE 115 =====
111 
LESSON 37:  PREGNANCY AND FETAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
FERTILIZATION  
 Since the ovum only survives for about a 
day at most, fertilization occurs shortly after 
ovulation. Fertilization occurs near the 
infundibulum of the uterine tube. The fertilized 
ovum or zygote spends about six days in the uterine 
tube then enters the uterus and implants in the 
endometrium.   
 Toward the end of the sexual cycle, levels 
of GnRH and LH fall as usual.  However, if 
implantation is to be sustained, levels of estrogen 
and progesterone from the corpus luteum must be 
maintained.  To replace the stimulatory function of 
LH in the ovary, certain cells derived from the 
zygote called trophoblast cells produce the 
hormone HCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) 
that sustains the maternal corpus luteum for about 
the first trimester of pregnancy.  That is, the corpus 
luteum continues to produce estrogen and 
progesterone for about three months. Presence of 
HCG in the urine is used to confirm pregnancy.  
When HCG is no  longer produced, the corpus 
luteum no longer generates steroid hormones.  
Levels of estrogens and progesterone remain high, 
however, because by the third month, the placenta 
is developed and is now able to produce them.  The 
placenta remains the source of these hormones until 
the onset of labor. 
PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT 
 Period of the Zygote.  Fertilization occurs 
in the ovarian end of the uterine tube.  Over the 
next five to seven days, the zygote makes its way to 
the uterus to become implanted in the uterine lining. 
This is the time required for the uterine lining to 
reach full thickness under stimulation by the 
ovarian hormones. At implantation, this period 
ends.  
  Within 24 hours of fertilization, the ovum 
begins its cell divisions forming first a solid sphere 
of cells and then a hollow ball of cells called the 
blastocyst.  At this point, the cells all derived from 
the single ovum differentiate into two types:  The 
cells forming the hollow sphere are called 
trophoblast cells.  They help sustain the embryo 
but are not destined to become part of the embryo.  
The rest of the cells form an inner cell mass called 
the embryoblast within the cavity of the blastocyst. 
 These are the cells that will form the embryo, fetus, 
and ultimately, the infant.  About a week af ter 
fertilization, the trophoblast cells penetrate the 
endometrium and the next phase begins. 
 Period of the Embryo .  The second 
through eighth week after fertilization is the period 
of the embryo.  During this time, the embryoblast, 
now called the embryo,  develops the rudiments of 
all internal organs.  By the middle of this period, a 
primitive heart is already beating and pumping 
blood through the developing circulatory system.  
By the eighth week, the embryo is about 3 
centimeters long and weighs about 5 grams.  Its 
head, eyes, ears, nose, mouth  and the limbs with 
fingers and toes, clearly distinguish it as human.  It 
is surrounded by a membrane called the amnion 
filled with amniotic fluid for cushioning and 
support. 
 The trophoblast, now called the chorion, 
also undergoes dramatic changes.  The embryo 
becomes attached to the chorion by a slender stalk 
called the umbilical cord. Chorion cells develop 
projections called the chorionic villi that extend 
over the entire outer surface of the chorion.  
Eventually only those villi adjacent to the 
endometrium of the uterus will persist and form the 
fetal portion of the placenta.   With the placenta 
well established, the period of the embryo comes to 
an end. 
  Period of the Fetus.  The beginning of the 
third month to the time of birth is the period of the 
fetus.  During this time, organs established during 
the embryonic period develop and grow more 
rapidly.  By the end of fetal life, the fetus will have 
grown to about 50 centimeters in length and weigh 
about 3000 gram s (6 -8 pounds).  The first fetal 
movements occur in the fifth month of pregnancy.   
The brain grows most dramatically.  At birth, the 
infant is only about 5% of adult size.  But the brain 
is already 25% of adult size.  This is apparent when 
observing the relatively large size of the cranium of 
the infant relative to the size of the facial bones.    
 During this period, the chorion develops 
into a placenta. The fetus is attached to the 
placenta by the umbilical cord . Besides 
producing estrogen and progestero ne, the placenta 
must act as the lungs, kidneys and digestive

===== PAGE 116 =====
112 
system of the fetus. The need for fetal circulation 
to the placenta is clear.  The fetal lungs are 
collapsed and airless, not exchanging oxygen or 
carbon dioxide. The fetal digestive tract is no t 
absorbing nutrients and the fetal kidneys are not 
clearing wastes from the blood. All these 
functioins must be provided by maternal organs. 
Blood, low in nutrients and high in wastes, is 
carried from the fetus to the placenta through two 
umbilical arteri es. Blood is carried to tufts of 
capillaries called the chorionic villi  of the fetal 
placenta. The villa are bathed with maternal blood 
flowing through sinus cavities of the maternal 
placenta. Oxygen and other nutrients are 
transferred from maternal to fet al blood and 
transported to the fetus through the single 
umbilical vein.  Carbon dioxide and other fetal 
wastes are transferred to the maternal blood. 
THE FETAL HEART 
 Because the fetal lungs are not ventilating, 
it would seem wasteful to send half the ca rdiac 
output through the pulmonary circulation as occurs 
when the lungs are ventilating. Two anatomical 
pathways in the fetal circulation divert blood away 
from the pulmonary artery and shunt it directly into 
the systemic circulation. Blood entering the ri ght 
atrium can pass 
directly into the 
left atrium 
through an 
opening in the 
septum called 
the foramen 
ovale.  From 
there it enters 
the left ventricle 
and is pumped into the aorta.  Blood that does pass 
to the right ventricle and then to the pulmonary 
artery can still avoid circulating through the lungs. 
A vessel called the ductus arteriosus  transfers 
pulmonary arterial blood directly into the aorta. At 
birth, the inflation of the lungs with air causes the 
vessels of the lungs to expand as well. Pulmonary 
vascular resistance falls and blood flow through 
the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus reverses. 
A one -way valve in the foramen ovale closes to 
block flow. Muscles in the ductus arteriosus begin 
to constrict and within a week, it is totally 
occluded. 
 
MATERNAL ADJUSTMENTS 
 Adjustment to the pregnant mother’s 
physiology are required to meet the demands of  
pregnancy.  
For the digestive system, the increase in 
metabolic rate causes an increase in appetite, 
ensuring availability of adequate nutrients for 
growth of the embryo and fetus. A normal weight 
gain of about 24 pounds is expected. During the 
third trimester, nutrients are required faster than 
they could be provided from the diet. To prevent a 
deficiency, reserves of nutrients begin to be stored 
in the pla centa during the second trimester. A 
negative effect on the digestive is maternal 
heartburn and indigestion caused compression of 
the intestines in the congested abdominal cavity. 
 By full term, the placenta is going to 
require a maternal blood flow of about 600-650 ml 
per minute. During pregnancy, maternal blood 
volume increase s by about 30% due to fluid 
retention and hemopoiesis (blood cell production). 
Cardiac output gradually increases by about 30% 
over the course of the pregnancy. A negative 
circulatory effect is increased risk of hemorrhoids 
and varicose veins due of compression of 
abdominal blood vessels  that impedes venous 
return through the inferior vena cava. 
 The increase in metabolic rate requires 
about a 50% increase in ventilation as pregnancy 
proceeds. The increase is achieved primarily by 
increasing respiratory rate. Again, congestion in 
the abdominal cavity makes it difficult to breathe 
more deeply. 
 In the kidneys, maternal glomerular 
filtration rate increases by about 50% and urine 
output i ncreases slightly, enabling the mother to 
dispose of additional wastes of the developing 
fetus. Aldosterone and the reproductive hormones 
act on the kidneys to promote water retention and 
sustain blood pressure. Compression of the 
urinary bladder makes it necessary to void more 
frequently. 
 Growth of skin in the abdominal area may 
produce stretch marks associated with dermal 
expansion. There may be a temporary darkening 
of skin on the nose a cheeks, called chloasma or 
“the mask of pregnancy”.

===== PAGE 117 =====
113 
CHILDBIRTH 
 About 280 days (nine months) after 
fertilization, levels of estrogen and progesterone 
fall and oxytocin levels rise inducing contractions 
of the uterine myometrium as the infant is born.  
Parturition is the process of giving birth by means 
of contractions o f the mother’s uterine and 
abdominal muscles. Contractions occurring at full 
term are initiated hormonally. Progesterone 
inhibits contractions and estrogen and oxytocin 
stimulate contractions. During late pregnancy, the 
pituitary stores more oxytocin and t he uterus 
develops more oxytocin receptors. The uterine 
myometrial mass increases throughout pregnancy 
as uterine smooth muscle cells undergo 
hyperplasia (divide). Oxytocin stimulates 
contraction of the uterine myometrium directly. 
Weak contractions, calle d Braxton -Hicks 
contractions, can occur during pregnancy as “false 
labor”.   
 Contractions begins about 30 minutes 
apart, gradually increasing in frequency to 1 -3 
minutes apart. The intermittent contractions allow 
time in between to ensure adequate blood f low is 
maintained to the uterus and fetus. Contractions 
are strongest in the fundus and body of the uterus, 
propelling the fetus toward the cervix. 
 Childbirth is an example of a positive 
feedback loop. Pressure of the fetal head against 
the cervix causes sensory nerves to signal the 
release of oxytocin. The contractions caused by 
oxytocin cause the fetal head to be forced against 
the cervix with more pressure. This initiates the 
release of more oxytocin that causes more 
pressure and so on.  As uterine contr actions 
progress, a spinal reflex causes the contraction of 
abdominal muscles to provide added help in the 
delivery process.  
PUERPERIUM 
 Mother’s recovery from pregnancy, 
occurring over a period of about six weeks, is 
referred to as the puerperium. During  this period, 
the uterus shrinks to its pregravid weight in about 
four weeks. The process, referred to as involution, 
is accomplished by autolysis (self-digestion) using 
lysosomal enzymes. Vaginal discharge resulting 
from involution is called lochia. 
 Involution is aided by breastfeeding that 
suppresses estrogen production. The release of 
oxytocin needed for milk ejection, also facilitates 
the process by causing uterine contractions that 
reduce blood flow to the shrinking uterus.  
LACTATION 
  During pregnan cy, more extensive 
development of alveolar ducts and glands within the 
breasts occurs under the influence of estrogen and 
progesterone.  Levels of the anterior pituitary 
hormone prolactin also increase. While the 
function of prolactin is to stimulate milk production 
in breast tissue, the high levels of estrogen and 
progesterone during pregnancy override the effect.  
With the falling levels of the steroid hormones at 
birth, prolactin begins to stimulate production of 
milk rich in galactose, calcium and fats.  Following 
birth, levels of prolactin would return to pre -
pregnancy levels within a week or so.  But each 
time the mother nurses, tactile stimulation of the 
nipple causes a surge in prolactin release to sustain 
milk production.  With continued stimulation , the 
ability to lactate could last for years.  Tactile 
stimulation of the breast also causes a neural reflex 
that results in the release of the hypothalamic 
hormone oxytocin, causing contraction of the 
alveolar ducts and milk ejection. 
Female Reproductive Hormones 
Hormone Function(s) 
Estrogen Fetal development of female 
reproductive organs 
Uterine development throughout 
reproductive cycle 
Breast development, especially 
ducts 
Secondary characteristics 
including: 
     Early epiphyseal disk closure 
     Female fat deposition pattern 
Progesterone Uterine development after 
ovulation 
Breast development, especially 
alveolar glands 
Quiet the myometrium during 
pregnancy 
Oxytocin Uterine contractions during labor 
Milk ejection from breast tissue 
Prolactin Milk production in breast tissue

===== PAGE 118 =====
114 
LESSON 38:  EXERCISE PHYSIOLOGY  
  
As a way of demonstrating how the organ 
systems we've examined work together for the 
benefit of the organism, let's consider how the 
organism responds to the stress of exercise. 
ENERGY PRODUCTION 
 The energy required by the body is in the 
form of ATP, adenosine triphosphate.  Strenuous 
exercise increases ATP consumption by as much as 
ten times.  The stored ATP in muscle cells is used 
up within a few seconds.  The ADP remaining after 
energy expenditure can be recharged to ATP by 
creatine phosphate.  The phosphate is donated to 
ADP converting it to ATP.  But this source is 
probably depleted after about 10 seconds of 
strenuous exercise.  Stored glycogen in the muscle 
can be anaerobically converted to pyruvic acid 
(glycolysis) and then lactic acid, providing ATP 
lasting only for about a minute or so of strenuous 
exercise.  Sustaining exercise beyond this time 
requires a continuous supply of nutrients from 
outside the cells and a continuous supply of oxygen 
from the lungs.  ATP is then produced in the 
mitochondria by burning carbohydrates, fats and 
proteins through glycolysis, the citric acid cycle and 
the electron transport chain.  The nutrients for this 
source of ATP are provided by the digestive system 
and stored in the liver and muscle (as glycogen) or 
adipose tissue (as fat).  The mitochondrial energy 
lasts as long as the nutrients and oxygen can be 
provided to the cells.    
 
Energy System Activity Time 
Creatine Phosphate  Weight lifting 10 sec 
CP and GLA Home run  
GlycogenLactic Acid Tennis ~1 min 
GLA and Aerobic Boxing  
Aerobic Jogging No limit 
 
MUSCLES IN EXERCISE 
 Exercise can be categorized into two 
extremes; exercise requiring primarily strength and 
exercise involving primarily endurance.  There are 
actually two types of muscle cells, one type adapted 
for strength and one type for endurance.  Strength 
exercises promote the formation of fast twitch 
(white) muscle cells with more enzymes for 
metabolism of cr eatine phosphate and muscle 
glycogen.  These cells can respond quickly 
providing considerable strength, but the energy 
sources they are designed to use are rapidly 
expended, as discussed above.   Endurance 
exercises promote the development of slow twitch 
(red) muscle.  These cells are designed to make use 
of external nutrients and oxygen.  The cells have 
more mitochondria, a better blood supply and 
contain myoglobin, a protein similar to hemoglobin 
that enables them to store their own oxygen.  The 
mitochondrial energy source lasts as long as 
nutrients are provided. All muscles in the body 
actually contain both types of cells.  The ratio of 
white to red cells varies between different muscle 
groups and between individuals.  The differences 
between individuals are genetically determined.  So 
some athletes are born to be sprinters (muscle 
strength) while others are born to be marathon 
runners (muscle endurance). 
 Exercise promotes muscle growth by 
causing muscle cells to hypertrophy (enlarge) and 
increase their c ontent of contractile protein (actin 
and myosin).  Overall muscle mass is the result of 
not only of training but also the reproductive 
hormone environment. While muscle cells in males 
and females provide the same strength, the anabolic 
steroid hormone test osterone enables males to 
achieve a total muscle mass as much a 40% greater 
than females.   
  Weight training, in which muscles are 
provided with the greatest resistance possible, 
builds muscle mass most rapidly. Muscle cells can 
increase size by up to 30%  after 6 to 8 week of 
resistance training. No load training provides very 
little or no increase in muscle mass.   
 
ENDURANCE EXERCISE 
 Energy production to sustain endurance 
exercise requires a continuous supply of nutrients 
and oxygen for the exercising c ells.  The most 
important nutrient for muscle endurance is the 
glycogen stored in the muscle itself.  Muscle has a 
maximum capacity of about 40 grams of glycogen 
per kilogram of muscle.  To maximize the amount 
of glycogen in muscle, a high carbohydrate die t is 
required.  “Carbo loading” can double the amount 
of glycogen in the muscles and thus the time to 
exhaustion compared to a mixed diet.  A high fat 
diet actually decreases the time to exhaustion.   
Carbohydrates are also provided from 
glycogen stored in  the liver and from glucose 
solutions consumed during the exercise period.  
However, as time passes, carbohydrate becomes 
less important and fat becomes more important as 
the source of nutrient for energy production.  After

===== PAGE 119 =====
115 
3 or 4 hours of exercise, fat be come the major 
nutrient source.   
 Delivery of adequate raw materials (and 
elimination of metabolic wastes) requires 
participation of several organ systems: 
THE NERVOUS AND ENDOCRINE SYSTEMS 
 The whole body response to exercise is 
coordinated by the sympat hetic nervous system.  
Receptors in exercising muscle along with 
chemoreceptors and baroreceptors stimulate the 
lungs, heart and blood vessels to respond 
appropriately, increasing delivery of nutrients to 
skeletal muscles.  The endocrine system provides 
many important hormones to help meet the 
demands of exercise.  Epinephrine and 
norepinephrine, from the adrenal medulla, are the 
most important. The hormones extend and prolong 
the sympathetic effects.  They act as a backup for 
the nervous system. For example, if the heart were 
denervated (following a heart transplant), 
epinephrine would still increase cardiac output 
during exercise. Hormones like cortisol and 
glucagon help to provide increases in blood glucose 
to fuel ATP production. Glucagon, the protein 
hormone, would act most quickly, causing liver 
glycogen to be converted to glucose and raising 
blood glucose levels. Cortisol, being a steroid 
hormone, would not be immediately effective 
during the bout of exercise.  Recall that steroid 
hormones alter protein  production by activating 
genes within the nucleus of target cells and require 
hours or even days to become fully effective. 
THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 
 Blood vessels in muscle dilate during 
exercise.  Part of the vasodilation is due to intrinsic 
factors.  Metabolites from exercising muscles 
themselves act to vasodilate blood vessels.  Part of 
the dilation is due to extrinsic factors.  For example, 
epinephrine vasodilates vessels in skeletal muscle.  
Recall from the Poiseuille relationship that there is 
a direct relationship between flow and radius to the 
fourth power.   The vasodilation in muscle vessels 
and the rise in blood pressure can increase local 
blood flow to muscle by about 25 times in 
strenuous exercise.  Yet, the ability to increase 
blood flow is the limiting factor in exercise. 
 Intrinsic mechanisms (Starling's Law of the 
Heart) can increase stroke volume and, therefore, 
cardiac output by 100 - 150%.  In this mechanism, 
increased venous return causes increased strength 
of contraction in heart muscle and increased cardiac 
output.  Extrinsic (humoral and neural) mechanisms 
act to further increase cardiac output by increasing 
both stroke volume and heart rate.  Together, 
intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms can increase 
cardiac output to nearly five tim es resting level.   
The relative importance of stroke volume and heart 
rate in providing increased cardiac output is shown 
in the figure.  Notice that most of the increase in 
output is due to heart rate increase.  Note that stroke 
volume reaches its maximum when cardiac output 
is only half maximum, so the further increase in 
cardiac output is only due to increased heart rate.  
 In non -endurance trained individuals, the 
increase in output relies more on the heart rate 
increase.  Regular endurance exercise s trengthens 
the heart by enlarging the cardiac muscle cells 
(hypertrophy), enabling it to pump a larger stroke 
volume and making the heart less reliant on a 
higher heart rate during exercise. This significantly 
increases cardiac efficiency.  In fact, while the 
untrained individual can increase resting cardiac 
output by 300 to 400 percent during maximal 
exercise, a marathon runner can increase cardiac 
output by 500 to 600 percent and when maximum 
cardiac output has been reached, the runner’s heart 
rate will still be less than that of the non-athlete. To 
begin to produce this change, the endurance 
exercise needs to be fairly intense (at least 60% 
maximum), for at least twenty minutes, performed 
at least three times a week. 
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
 Oxygen consumption is about 250 ml/min 
at rest in an adult male.  During strenuous exercise, 
this can increase about 10 to 20 times, depending 
on level of training. The increase in oxygen 
consumption is accompanied by a linear increase in 
ventilation, accomplished by in creasing both 
breathing frequency and depth.  (A portion of the

===== PAGE 120 =====
116 
inspiratory and expiratory reserve volumes is added 
to the normal tidal volume.)  Even during maximal 
exercise, ventilation is only at about 65% 
maximum.  Therefore, ventilation is normally not a 
limiting factor in endurance exercise. (But smokers 
beware!) 
  The increase in ventilation is 
accompanied by an increase in lung perfusion as 
cardiac output is increased.  The combined effect is 
to open additional pulmonary alveoli and 
capillaries, the reby increasing the surface area 
available for diffusion of respiratory gases.  
Specifically, the oxygen diffusing capacity of the 
lung increases from about 23 ml/min/mmHg at rest 
to about 60 ml/min/mmHg in strenuous exercise.   
The increase in diffusing c apacity is 
sufficient to maintain normal arterial blood gas 
levels- a PO2 of 100 mm Hg and a P CO2 of 40 mm 
Hg. However, while oxygenation of blood takes 
only about a third of the time available at rest, all 
the time available may be required during exercise. 
So smokers who have damaged their lungs to the 
extent that it takes all the time available to 
oxygenate their blood at rest, are going to become 
immediately short of breath during exercise and 
their arterial P O2 will be significantly below 
normal.  
More oxygen is extracted from hemoglobin 
during exercise, so mixed venous PO 2, normally 
about 40 mm Hg, may fall to around 10 or 15 
mmHg. The mixed venous hemoglobin that is 
normally still 75% saturated with oxygen, may now 
be less than 20% saturated.  
BODY HEAT AND FLUID BALANCE 
 Increasing ATP production is accompanied 
by increased heat production.  To dissipate this 
heat, blood flow to the skin is increased.  At the 
body surface heat is lost by the conventional means- 
infrared radiation, convection, conducti on and 
evaporation. In e vaporation of sweat containing 
water and salts, as much as 5 to 10 pounds of water 
(along with salt) per hour can be lost during 
strenuous exercise on a hot day.  After the exercise, 
salt and water are replenished through the urinar y 
system under endocrine control. The hormone ADH 
increases water reabsorption, correcting for 
dehydration (water loss). The hormone aldosterone 
increases reabsorption of salt and water, correcting 
for volume depletion (salt and water loss). Besides 
reabsorbing salt from urine, aldosterone also 
reduces the s alt content of sweat. If bouts of 
exercise are repeated daily, within a week or so, 
levels of salt in sweat fall significantly. 
RECOVERING FROM EXERCISE 
 Exercise depletes the stores of oxygen, 
glycogen and phosphocreatine in the body and 
causes lactic acid to accumulate.  Oxygen is stored 
in the air in the lungs and in body fluids as well as 
in chemical association with the hemoglobin and 
myoglobin molecules.  
Following exercise, hemoglobin and 
myoglobin oxygen saturation is significant ly 
reduced, as mentioned above. To recover the loss, 
ventilation (oxygen consumption) remains high  
even after the exercise has been completed.   The 
oxygen thus provided restores phosphocreatine and 
oxygen levels within minu tes.  In addition, the 
oxidative metabolism consumes some of the lactic 
acid that accumulated.  The rest of the lactic acid is 
metabolized back to glucose in the liver and the 
glucose used to replenish glycogen.  Metabolic 
removal of lactic acid is a slower process that lasts 
for about an hour after the exercise period.   
 Glycogen replacement requires much more 
time.  While a high carbohydrate diet is best, it still 
takes about two days to bring glycogen stores back 
to pre-exercise levels.  On a high fat diet, glycogen 
stores may not be back to normal even after five 
days.  So for maximum efficiency, one should allow 
at least two days of rest between endurance events 
of several hours or more duration.    
 The ability of the organism to function 
under normal conditions and under conditions of 
stress, as in exercise, involves the coordinated 
efforts of all organ systems working together.  
BENEFITS OF EXERCISE 
 Many studies have shown that people who 
maintain appropriate body fitness, including 
exercise and weight control, live longer. Some of 
the benefits of exercise include: 
 Reduced blood pressure, cholesterol and low 
density lipoproteins lower the risk of heart 
disease. 
 Increased physiological reserves available in 
times of sickness. 
 Reduced risk of chronic d iseases related to 
obesity including type II diabetes. 
 Reduced risk of several type s of cancers 
through mechanisms still not fully understood.
